Germany
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about the country. For other uses, see Germany (disambiguation) and Deutschland (disambiguation).
"Federal Republic of Germany" redirects here. For the country from 1949–1990, see West Germany.
Coordinates: 51°N 9°E

Federal Republic of Germany
Bundesrepublik Deutschland (German)[a]
Flag of Germany
Flag
Coat of arms of Germany
Coat of arms
Motto: 
"Einigkeit und Recht und Freiheit" (de facto)
"Unity and Justice and Freedom"
Anthem: "Deutschlandlied" (third verse only)[b]
"Song of Germany"
MENU0:00
 Location of  Germany  (dark green)– in Europe  (green & dark grey)– in the European Union  (green)
Location of  Germany  (dark green)
– in Europe  (green & dark grey)
– in the European Union  (green)

Capital
and largest city	Berlin[c]
52°31'N 13°23'E
Official language
and national language	German[1][d]
Ethnic groups (2015[2])	
79.0% Germans
11.0% Other Europeans
7.0% Asians
—2.3% Middle Eastern
—3.5% Turks
0.8% Africans
0.5% Americans
1.7% unspecified
Religion	
59.3% Christianity
34.4% Not religious
5.5% Islam
0.8% Other religions[3]
Demonym	German
Government	Federal constitutional parliamentary republic
• President
Frank-Walter Steinmeier
• Chancellor
Angela Merkel (acting; according to paragraph (3) of Article 69 of the Basic Law)[4]
• President of the Bundestag
Wolfgang Schäuble
• President of the Bundesrat
Michael Müller
• President of the Federal Constitutional Court
Andreas Voßkuhle
Legislature	
• Upper house
Bundesrat
• Lower house
Bundestag
Area
• Total
357,168 km2 (137,903 sq mi) (62nd)
Population
• 30 June 2016 estimate
Increase 82,349,400[5] (16th)
• Density
232/km2 (600.9/sq mi) (58th)
GDP (PPP)	2017 estimate
• Total
$4.150 trillion[6] (5th)
• Per capita
$50,206[6] (18th)
GDP (nominal)	2017 estimate
• Total
$3.652 trillion[6] (4th)
• Per capita
$44,184[6] (17th)
Gini (2016)	Positive decrease 29.5[7]
low
HDI (2015)	Increase 0.926[8]
very high · 4th
Currency	Euro (€) (EUR)
Time zone	CET (UTC+1)
• Summer (DST)
CEST (UTC+2)
Drives on the	right
Calling code	49
ISO 3166 code	DE
Internet TLD	.de and .eu
Germany (/'d???rm?ni/ (About this sound listen); German: Deutschland, pronounced ['d??t?lant]), officially the Federal Republic of Germany (German: Bundesrepublik Deutschland, About this sound listen (help·info)),[e][9] is a federal parliamentary republic in central-western Europe. It includes 16 constituent states, covers an area of 357,021 square kilometres (137,847 sq mi), and has a largely temperate seasonal climate. With about 82 million inhabitants, Germany is the most populous member state of the European Union. After the United States, it is the second most popular immigration destination in the world.[10][11] Germany's capital and largest metropolis is Berlin, while its largest conurbation is the Ruhr, with its main centres of Dortmund and Essen. The country's other major cities are Hamburg, Munich, Cologne, Frankfurt, Stuttgart, Düsseldorf, Leipzig, Bremen, Dresden, Hannover and Nuremberg.

Various Germanic tribes have inhabited the northern parts of modern Germany since classical antiquity. A region named Germania was documented before 100 AD. During the Migration Period, the Germanic tribes expanded southward. Beginning in the 10th century, German territories formed a central part of the Holy Roman Empire.[12] During the 16th century, northern German regions became the centre of the Protestant Reformation. After the collapse of the Holy Roman Empire, the German Confederation was formed in 1815. The German revolutions of 1848–49 resulted in the Frankfurt Parliament establishing major democratic rights.

In 1871, Germany became a nation state when most of the German states unified into the Prussian-dominated German Empire. After World War I and the revolution of 1918–19, the Empire was replaced by the parliamentary Weimar Republic. The Nazi seizure of power in 1933 led to the establishment of a dictatorship, World War II and the Holocaust. After the end of World War II in Europe and a period of Allied occupation, two German states were founded: the democratic West Germany and the socialist East Germany. Following the Revolutions of 1989 that ended communist rule in Central and Eastern Europe, the country was reunified on 3 October 1990.[13]

In the 21st century, Germany is a great power with a strong economy; it has the world's 4th largest economy by nominal GDP, and the 5th largest by PPP. As a global leader in several industrial and technological sectors, it is both the world's third-largest exporter and importer of goods. It is a developed country with a very high standard of living sustained by a skilled and productive society. It upholds a social security and universal health care system, environmental protection, and a tuition-free university education.[14]

The Federal Republic of Germany was a founding member of the European Economic Community in 1957 and the European Union in 1993. It is part of the Schengen Area, and became a co-founder of the Eurozone in 1999. Germany is a member of the United Nations, NATO, the G7 (formerly G8), the G20, and the OECD. The national military expenditure is the 9th highest in the world. Known for its rich cultural history, Germany has been continuously the home of influential and successful artists, philosophers, musicians, sportspeople, entrepreneurs, scientists, engineers, and inventors.

Contents  [hide] 
1	Etymology
2	History
2.1	Germanic tribes and Frankish Empire
2.2	East Francia and Holy Roman Empire
2.3	German Confederation and Empire
2.4	Weimar Republic and Nazi Germany
2.5	East and West Germany
2.6	Reunified Germany and European Union
3	Geography
3.1	Climate
3.2	Biodiversity
3.3	Urbanisation
4	Politics
4.1	Law
4.2	Constituent states
4.3	Foreign relations
4.4	Military
5	Economy
5.1	Companies
5.2	Transport
5.3	Energy and infrastructure
5.4	Science and technology
5.5	Tourism
6	Demographics
6.1	Immigrant population
6.2	Religion
6.3	Languages
6.4	Education
6.5	Health
7	Culture
7.1	Music
7.2	Art
7.3	Architecture
7.4	Literature and philosophy
7.5	Media
7.6	Cinema
7.7	Cuisine
7.8	Sports
7.9	Fashion and design
8	See also
9	Notes
10	References
11	External links
Etymology
Further information: Names of Germany
The English word Germany derives from the Latin Germania, which came into use after Julius Caesar adopted it for the peoples east of the Rhine.[15] The German term Deutschland, originally diutisciu land ("the German lands") is derived from deutsch (cf. dutch), descended from Old High German diutisc "popular" (i.e. belonging to the diot or diota "people"), originally used to distinguish the language of the common people from Latin and its Romance descendants. This in turn descends from Proto-Germanic *þiudiskaz "popular" (see also the Latinised form Theodiscus), derived from *þeudo, descended from Proto-Indo-European *tewtéh2- "people", from which the word "Teutons" also originates.[16]

History
Main article: History of Germany

The Nebra sky disk, c. 1700 BC
The discovery of the Mauer 1 mandible shows that ancient humans were present in Germany at least 600,000 years ago.[17] The oldest complete hunting weapons found anywhere in the world were discovered in a coal mine in Schöningen where three 380,000-year-old wooden javelins were unearthed.[18] The Neander Valley was the location where the first ever non-modern human fossil was discovered; the new species of human was called the Neanderthal. The Neanderthal 1 fossils are known to be 40,000 years old. Evidence of modern humans, similarly dated, has been found in caves in the Swabian Jura near Ulm. The finds include 42,000-year-old bird bone and mammoth ivory flutes which are the oldest musical instruments ever found,[19] the 40,000-year-old Ice Age Lion Man which is the oldest uncontested figurative art ever discovered,[20] and the 35,000-year-old Venus of Hohle Fels which is the oldest uncontested human figurative art ever discovered.[21] The Nebra sky disk is a bronze artifact created during the European Bronze Age attributed to a site near Nebra, Saxony-Anhalt. It is part of UNESCO's Memory of the World Programme.[22]

Germanic tribes and Frankish Empire
Main articles: Germania, Migration Period, and Frankish Realm

Migrations in Europe (100–500 AD)
The Germanic tribes are thought to date from the Nordic Bronze Age or the Pre-Roman Iron Age. From southern Scandinavia and north Germany, they expanded south, east and west from the 1st century BC, coming into contact with the Celtic tribes of Gaul as well as Iranian, Baltic, and Slavic tribes in Central and Eastern Europe.[23] Under Augustus, Rome began to invade Germania (an area extending roughly from the Rhine to the Ural Mountains). In 9 AD, three Roman legions led by Varus were defeated by the Cheruscan leader Arminius. By 100 AD, when Tacitus wrote Germania, Germanic tribes had settled along the Rhine and the Danube (the Limes Germanicus), occupying most of the area of modern Germany. However, Austria, Baden Württemberg, southern Bavaria, southern Hessen and the western Rhineland had been conquered and incorporated into Roman provinces: Noricum, Raetia, Germania Superior, and Germania Inferior.[24][25][26][27]


Frankish Realm and its expansion. As it was partitioned in 843, West Francia (blue) and East Francia (red) became predecessors of France and Germany, respectively
In the 3rd century a number of large West Germanic tribes emerged: Alemanni, Franks, Chatti, Saxons, Frisii, Sicambri, and Thuringii. Around 260, the Germanic peoples broke into Roman-controlled lands.[28] After the invasion of the Huns in 375, and with the decline of Rome from 395, Germanic tribes moved farther southwest. Simultaneously several large tribes formed in what is now Germany and displaced or absorbed smaller Germanic tribes. Large areas known since the Merovingian period as Austrasia, Neustria, and Aquitaine were conquered by the Franks who established the Frankish Kingdom, and pushed farther east to subjugate Saxony and Bavaria. Areas of what is today the eastern part of Germany were inhabited by Western Slavic tribes of Sorbs, Veleti and the Obotritic confederation.[24]

East Francia and Holy Roman Empire
Main articles: East Francia and Holy Roman Empire
In 800, the Frankish king Charlemagne was crowned emperor and founded the Carolingian Empire, which was later divided in 843 among his heirs.[29] Following the break up of the Frankish Realm, for 900 years, the history of Germany was intertwined with the history of the Holy Roman Empire,[30] which subsequently emerged from the eastern portion of Charlemagne's original empire. The territory initially known as East Francia stretched from the Rhine in the west to the Elbe River in the east and from the North Sea to the Alps.[29] The Ottonian rulers (919–1024) consolidated several major duchies and the German king Otto I was crowned Holy Roman Emperor of these regions in 962. In 996 Gregory V became the first German Pope, appointed by his cousin Otto III, whom he shortly after crowned Holy Roman Emperor. The Holy Roman Empire absorbed northern Italy and Burgundy under the reign of the Salian emperors (1024–1125), although the emperors lost power through the Investiture Controversy.[31]


Martin Luther (1483–1546) initiated the Protestant Reformation.
In the 12th century, under the Hohenstaufen emperors (1138–1254), German princes increased their influence further south and east into territories inhabited by Slavs; they encouraged German settlement in these areas, called the eastern settlement movement (Ostsiedlung). Members of the Hanseatic League, which included mostly north German cities and towns, prospered in the expansion of trade.[32] In the south, the Greater Ravensburg Trade Corporation (Große Ravensburger Handelsgesellschaft) served a similar function. The edict of the Golden Bull issued in 1356 by Emperor Charles IV provided the basic constitutional structure of the Empire and codified the election of the emperor by seven prince-electors who ruled some of the most powerful principalities and archbishoprics.[33]

Population declined in the first half of the 14th century, starting with the Great Famine in 1315, followed by the Black Death of 1348–50.[34] Despite the decline, however, German artists, engineers, and scientists developed a wide array of techniques similar to those used by the Italian artists and designers of the time who flourished in such merchant city-states as Venice, Florence and Genoa. Artistic and cultural centres throughout the German states produced such artists as the Augsburg painters Hans Holbein and his son, and Albrecht Dürer. Johannes Gutenberg introduced moveable-type printing to Europe, a development that laid the basis for the spread of learning to the masses.[35]


The Holy Roman Empire in 1648, after the Peace of Westphalia, which ended the Thirty Years' War
In 1517, the Wittenberg monk Martin Luther publicised The Ninety-Five Theses, challenging the Roman Catholic Church and initiating the Protestant Reformation. In 1555, the Peace of Augsburg established Lutheranism as an acceptable alternative to Catholicism, but also decreed that the faith of the prince was to be the faith of his subjects, a principle called Cuius regio, eius religio. The agreement at Augsburg failed to address other religious creed: for example, the Reformed faith was still considered a heresy and the principle did not address the possible conversion of an ecclesiastic ruler, such as happened in Electorate of Cologne in 1583. From the Cologne War until the end of the Thirty Years' Wars (1618–1648), religious conflict devastated German lands.[36] The latter reduced the overall population of the German states by about 30 per cent, and in some places, up to 80 per cent.[37] The Peace of Westphalia ended religious warfare among the German states.[36] German rulers were able to choose either Roman Catholicism, Lutheranism or the Reformed faith as their official religion after 1648.[38]

In the 18th century, the Holy Roman Empire consisted of approximately 1,800 territories.[39] The elaborate legal system initiated by a series of Imperial Reforms (approximately 1450–1555) created the Imperial Estates and provided for considerable local autonomy among ecclesiastical, secular, and hereditary states, reflected in Imperial Diet. The House of Habsburg held the imperial crown from 1438 until the death of Charles VI in 1740. Having no male heirs, he had convinced the Electors to retain Habsburg hegemony in the office of the emperor by agreeing to the Pragmatic Sanction. This was finally settled through the War of Austrian Succession; in the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, Charles VI's daughter Maria Theresa ruled the Empire as Empress Consort when her husband, Francis I, became Holy Roman Emperor. From 1740, the dualism between the Austrian Habsburg Monarchy and the Kingdom of Prussia dominated the German history.

In 1772, then again in 1793 and 1795, the two dominant German states of Prussia and Austria, along with the Russian Empire, agreed to the Partitions of Poland; dividing among themselves the lands of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. As a result of the partitions, millions of Polish speaking inhabitants fell under the rule of the two German monarchies. However, the annexed territories though incorporated into the Kingdom of Prussia and the Habsburg Realm, were not legally considered as a part of the Holy Roman Empire.[40][41] During the period of the French Revolutionary Wars, along with the arrival of the Napoleonic era and the subsequent final meeting of the Imperial Diet, most of the secular Free Imperial Cities were annexed by dynastic territories; the ecclesiastical territories were secularised and annexed. In 1806 the Imperium was dissolved; German states, particularly the Rhineland states, fell under the influence of France. Until 1815, France, Russia, Prussia and the Habsburgs competed for hegemony in the German states during the Napoleonic Wars.[42]

German Confederation and Empire
Main articles: German Confederation, German Empire, and German Colonial Empire

A map showing the German Confederation (1815-1836) with its 39 member states.
Following the fall of Napoleon, the Congress of Vienna (convened in 1814) founded the German Confederation (Deutscher Bund), a loose league of 39 sovereign states. The appointment of the Emperor of Austria as the permanent president of the Confederation reflected the Congress's failure to accept Prussia's influence among the German states, and acerbated the long-standing competition between the Hohenzollern and Habsburg interests. Disagreement within restoration politics partly led to the rise of liberal movements, followed by new measures of repression by Austrian statesman Metternich. The Zollverein, a tariff union, furthered economic unity in the German states.[43] National and liberal ideals of the French Revolution gained increasing support among many, especially young, Germans. The Hambach Festival in May 1832 was a main event in support of German unity, freedom and democracy. In the light of a series of revolutionary movements in Europe, which established a republic in France, intellectuals and commoners started the Revolutions of 1848 in the German states. King Frederick William IV of Prussia was offered the title of Emperor, but with a loss of power; he rejected the crown and the proposed constitution, leading to a temporary setback for the movement.[44]


Foundation of the German Empire in Versailles, 1871. Bismarck is at the centre in a white uniform.
King William I appointed Otto von Bismarck as the new Minister President of Prussia in 1862. Bismarck successfully concluded war on Denmark in 1864, which promoted German over Danish interests in the Jutland peninsula. The subsequent (and decisive) Prussian victory in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 enabled him to create the North German Confederation (Norddeutscher Bund) which excluded Austria from the federation's affairs. After the French defeat in the Franco-Prussian War, the German princes proclaimed the founding of the German Empire in 1871 at Versailles, uniting all the scattered parts of Germany except Austria. Prussia was the dominant constituent state of the new empire; the Hohenzollern King of Prussia ruled as its concurrent Emperor, and Berlin became its capital.[44]

In the Gründerzeit period following the unification of Germany, Bismarck's foreign policy as Chancellor of Germany under Emperor William I secured Germany's position as a great nation by forging alliances, isolating France by diplomatic means, and avoiding war. Under Wilhelm II, Germany, like other European powers, took an imperialistic course, leading to friction with neighbouring countries. Most alliances in which Germany had previously been involved were not renewed. This resulted in creation of a dual alliance with the multinational realm of Austria-Hungary, promoting at least benevolent neutrality if not outright military support. Subsequently, the Triple Alliance of 1882 included Italy, completing a Central European geographic alliance that illustrated German, Austrian and Italian fears of incursions against them by France and/or Russia. Similarly, Britain, France and Russia also concluded alliances that would protect them against Habsburg interference with Russian interests in the Balkans or German interference against France.[45]


The German Empire (1871–1918), with the Kingdom of Prussia in blue
At the Berlin Conference in 1884, Germany claimed several colonies including German East Africa, German South West Africa, Togoland, and Kamerun.[46] Later, Germany further expanded its colonial empire to include German New Guinea, German Micronesia and German Samoa in the Pacific, and Kiautschou Bay in China. In what became known as the "First Genocide of the Twentieth-Century", between 1904 and 1907, the German colonial government in South West Africa (present-day Namibia) ordered the annihilation of the local Herero and Namaqua peoples, as a punitive measure for an uprising against German colonial rule. In total, around 100,000 people—80% of the Herero and 50% of the Namaqua—perished from imprisonment in concentration camps, where the majority died of disease, abuse, and exhaustion, or from dehydration and starvation in the countryside after being deprived of food and water.[47][48]

The assassination of Austria's crown prince on 28 June 1914 provided the pretext for the Austrian Empire to attack Serbia and trigger World War I. After four years of warfare, in which approximately two million German soldiers were killed,[49] a general armistice ended the fighting on 11 November, and German troops returned home. In the German Revolution (November 1918), Emperor Wilhelm II and all German ruling princes abdicated their positions and responsibilities. Germany's new political leadership signed the Treaty of Versailles in 1919. In this treaty, Germany, as part of the Central Powers, accepted defeat by the Allies in one of the bloodiest conflicts of all time. Germans perceived the treaty as humiliating and unjust and it was later seen by historians as influential in the rise of Adolf Hitler.[50][51][52] After the defeat in the First World War, Germany lost around 13% of its European territory (areas predominantly inhabited by ethnic Polish, French and Danish populations, which were lost following the Greater Poland Uprising, the return of Alsace-Lorraine and the Schleswig plebiscites), and all of its colonial possessions in Africa and the South Sea.[53]ophers, musicians, sportspeople, entrepreneurs, scientists, engineers, 
and inventors.




The Netherlands (/'n?ð?rl?ndz/ (About this sound listen); Dutch: Nederland ['ne?d?r?l?nt] (About this sound listen)), also known informally as Holland, is a country in Western Europe with a population of seventeen million. Together with three island territories in the Caribbean (Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba), it forms the main constituent country of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. The European portion of the Netherlands consists of twelve provinces and borders Germany to the east, Belgium to the south, and the North Sea to the northwest, sharing maritime borders in the North Sea with Belgium, the United Kingdom, and Germany.[11] The five largest cities in the Netherlands are Amsterdam, Rotterdam, The Hague, Utrecht (forming the Randstad megalopolis) and Eindhoven (leading the Brabantse Stedenrij). Amsterdam is the country's capital,[12] while The Hague holds the Dutch seat of parliament and government.[13] The Port of Rotterdam is the largest port in Europe and the world's largest outside East Asia.[14]

"Netherlands" literally means "lower countries", influenced by its low land and flat geography, with only about 50% of its land exceeding one metre above sea level.[15] Most of the areas below sea level are artificial. Since the late 16th century, large areas (polders) have been reclaimed from the sea and lakes, amounting to nearly 17% of the country's current land mass. With a population density of 412 people per km2 – 507 if water is excluded – the Netherlands is classified as a very densely populated country. Only Bangladesh, South Korea, and Taiwan have both a larger population and higher population density. Nevertheless, the Netherlands is the world's second-largest exporter of food and agricultural products, after the United States.[16][17] This is partly due to the fertility of the soil and the mild climate as well as its highly developed intensive agriculture. The Netherlands was the third country in the world to have elected representatives controlling the government's actions; it has been administered as a parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy since 1848, organised as a unitary state. The Netherlands has a long history of social tolerance and is generally regarded as a liberal country, having legalised abortion, prostitution and euthanasia, while maintaining a progressive drugs policy. The Netherlands abolished the death penalty in 1870 and had women's suffrage introduced in 1919. Accepting of the LGBT community, it became the world's first country to legalise same-sex marriage in 2001.

The Netherlands is a founding member of the EU, Eurozone, G-10, NATO, OECD and WTO, as well as being a part of the Schengen Area and the trilateral Benelux Union. The country is host to the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and five international courts: the Permanent Court of Arbitration, the International Court of Justice, the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the International Criminal Court and the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. The first four are situated in The Hague, as is the EU's criminal intelligence agency Europol and judicial cooperation agency Eurojust and the United Nations Detention Unit. This has led to the city being dubbed "the world's legal capital."[18] The country also ranks second highest in the world's 2016 Press Freedom Index, as published by Reporters Without Borders.[19] The Netherlands has a market-based mixed economy, ranking 17th of 177 countries according to the Index of Economic Freedom.[20] It had the thirteenth-highest per capita income in the world in 2016 according to the International Monetary Fund. In 2017, the United Nations World Happiness Report ranked the Netherlands as the sixth-happiest country in the world, reflecting its high quality of life.[21][nb 1] The Netherlands also has a generous welfare state that provides universal healthcare, good public education and infrastructure, and a wide range of social benefits. That welfare system combined with its strongly redistributive taxing system makes the Netherlands one of the most egalitarian countries worldwide. It also ranks joint third highest in the Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index, along with Australia.

Contents  [hide] 
1	Etymology
2	History
2.1	Prehistory (before 800 BC)
2.2	Celts, Germanic tribes and Romans (800 BC–410 AD)
2.3	Early Middle Ages (411–1000)
2.4	High Middle Ages (1000–1384)
2.5	Burgundian and Habsburg Netherlands (1384–1581)
2.6	Dutch Republic (1581–1795)
2.7	Batavian Republic and kingdom (1795–1890)
2.8	World wars and beyond (1890–present)
3	Geography
3.1	Floods
3.2	Delta Works
3.3	Climate
3.4	Nature
3.5	Caribbean islands
4	Politics
4.1	Political culture
4.2	Political parties
5	Government
5.1	Administrative divisions
5.2	Foreign relations
5.3	Military
6	Economy
6.1	Natural gas
6.2	Agriculture
6.3	Transport
7	Demographics
7.1	Functional urban areas
7.2	Language
7.3	Religion
7.4	Education
7.4.1	Cities that are home to a university
7.5	Healthcare
8	Culture
8.1	Art, philosophy and literature
8.2	Dutch value system
8.3	Dutch people and ecology
8.4	Music
8.5	Film and television
8.6	Sports
8.7	Cuisine
8.8	Colonial heritage
9	See also
10	Notes
11	References
12	Further reading
13	External links
Etymology[edit]
See also: Netherlands (terminology)
The Netherlands' turbulent history and shifts of power resulted in exceptionally many and widely varying names in different languages. There is diversity even within languages. This holds also for English, where Dutch is the adjective form and the misnomer Holland a synonym for the country "the Netherlands". Dutch comes from Theodiscus and in the past centuries, the hub of Dutch culture is found in its most populous region, Holland, home to the capital city of Amsterdam; government headquarters at The Hague; and Europe's largest port Rotterdam. Referring to the Netherlands as Holland in the English language is similar to calling the United Kingdom "England" by people outside the UK. The term is so pervasive among potential investors and tourists, however, that the Dutch government's international websites for tourism and trade are "holland.com" and "hollandtradeandinvest.com".[23]

The region of Holland consists of North and South Holland, two of the nation's twelve provinces, formerly a single province, and earlier still, the County of Holland, a remnant of the dissolved Frisian Kingdom. Following the decline of the Duchy of Brabant and the County of Flanders Holland became the most economically and politically important county in the Low Countries region. The emphasis on Holland during the formation of the Dutch Republic, the Eighty Years' War and the Anglo-Dutch Wars in the 16th, 17th and 18th century, made Holland serve as a pars pro toto for the entire country, which is now considered either incorrect,[24][25] informal,[26] or, depending on context, opprobrious. Nonetheless, Holland is widely used in reference to the Netherlands national football team.[27]

The region called Low Countries (comprising Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg) and the Country of the Netherlands, have the same toponymy. Place names with Neder (or lage), Nieder, Nether (or low) and Nedre (in Germanic languages) and Bas or Inferior (in Romance languages) are in use in places all over Europe. They are sometimes used in a deictic relation to a higher ground that consecutively is indicated as Upper, Boven, Oben, Superior or Haut. In the case of the Low Countries / the Netherlands the geographical location of the lower region has been more or less downstream and near the sea. The geographical location of the upper region, however, changed over time tremendously, depending on the location of the economic and military power gouverning the Low Countries area. The Romans made a distinction between the Roman provinces of downstream Germania Inferior (nowadays part of Belgium and the Netherlands) and upstream Germania Superior (nowadays part of Germany). The designation 'Low' to refer to the region returns again in the 10th century Duchy of Lower Lorraine, that covered much of the Low Countries.[28][29] But this time the corresponding Upper region is Upper Lorraine, in nowadays Northern France.

The Dukes of Burgundy, who ruled the Low Countries in the 15th century, used the term les pays de par deçà (~ the lands over here) for the Low Countries as opposed to les pays de par delà (~ the lands over there) for their original homeland: Burgundy in present-day east-central France.[30] Under Habsburg rule, Les pays de par deçà developed in pays d'embas (lands down-here),[31] a deictic expression in relation to other Habsburg possessions like Hungary and Austria. This was translated as Neder-landen in contemporary Dutch official documents.[32] From a regional point of view, Niderlant was also the area between the Meuse and the lower Rhine in the late Middle Ages. The area known as Oberland (High country) was in this deictic context considered to begin approximately at the nearby higher located Cologne.

From the mid-sixteenth century on, "the Low Countries" and "the Netherlands" lost their original deictic meaning. They were probably the most commonly used names, besides Flanders, another pars pro toto for the Low Countries, especially in Romance language speaking Europe. The Eighty Years' War (1568–1648) divided the Low Countries into an independent northern Dutch Republic (or Latinised Belgica Foederata, "Federated Netherlands", the precursor state of the Netherlands) and a Spanish controlled Southern Netherlands (Latinised Belgica Regia, "Royal Netherlands", the precursor state of Belgium). The Low Countries today is a designation that includes the countries the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg, although in most Romance languages, the term "Low Countries" is used as the name for the Netherlands specifically. It is used synonymous with the more neutral and geopolitical term Benelux.

History[edit]
Main article: History of the Netherlands
Prehistory (before 800 BC)[edit]
Main articles: Paleolithic Europe, Neolithic Europe, and Bronze Age Europe

The Netherlands in 5500 BC

Bronze Age cultures in the Netherlands

Oak figurine found in Willemstad (4500 BC)
The prehistory of the area that is now the Netherlands was largely shaped by the sea and the rivers that constantly shifted the low-lying geography. The oldest human (Neanderthal) traces were found in higher soils, near Maastricht, from what is believed to be about 250,000 years ago.[33] At the end of the Ice Age, the nomadic late Upper Paleolithic Hamburg culture (c. 13.000–10.000 BC) hunted reindeer in the area, using spears, while the later Ahrensburg culture (c. 11.200–9500 BC) used bow and arrow. From Mesolithic Maglemosian-like tribes (c. 8000 BC) the oldest canoe in the world was found in Drenthe.[34] Indigenous late Mesolithic hunter-gatherers from the Swifterbant culture (c. 5600 BC) were related to the southern Scandinavian Ertebølle culture and were strongly linked to rivers and open water.[35] Between 4800 and 4500 BC, the Swifterbant people started to copy from the neighbouring Linear Pottery culture the practise of animal husbandry, and between 4300 and 4000 BC the practise of agriculture.[36] To Swifterbant related Funnelbeaker culture (c. 4300–2800 BC) erected the dolmens, large stone grave monuments found in Drenthe. There was a quick and smooth transition from the Funnelbeaker farming culture to the pan-European Corded Ware pastoralist culture (c. 2950 BC). Although in the southwest, the Seine-Oise-Marne culture related Vlaardingen culture (c. 2600 BC), an apparently more primitive culture of hunter-gatherers, survived well into the Neolithic period, until it was finally succeeded by the Corded Ware culture as well.

Of the subsequent Bell Beaker culture (2700–2100 BC) several regions of origin have been postulated, notably the Iberian peninsula, the Netherlands and Central Europe.[37] They introduced metalwork in copper, gold and later bronze and opened international trade routes not seen before, reflected in the discoveries of copper artifacts, as the metal is not normally found in Dutch soil. The many finds in Drenthe of rare bronze objects, suggest that it was even a trading centre in the Bronze Age (2000–800 BC). The Bell Beaker culture developed locally into the Barbed-Wire Beaker culture (2100–1800 BC) and later the Elp culture (c. 1800–800 BC),[38] a Middle Bronze Age archaeological culture having earthenware pottery of low quality as a marker. The initial phase of the Elp culture was characterised by tumuli (1800–1200 BC) that were strongly tied to contemporary tumuli in northern Germany and Scandinavia, and were apparently related to the Tumulus culture in central Europe. The subsequent phase was that of cremating the dead and placing their ashes in urns which were then buried in fields, following the customs of the Urnfield culture (1200–800 BC). The southern region became dominated by the related Hilversum culture (1800–800 BC), which apparently inherited cultural ties with Britain of the previous Barbed-Wire Beaker culture.

Celts, Germanic tribes and Romans (800 BC–410 AD)[edit]
Main articles: Iron Age Europe, Celts, Germanic peoples, and Romans in the Netherlands

  Diachronic distribution of Celtic people from 500 BC
  Expansion into the southern Low Countries by 270 BC
From 800 BC onwards, the Iron Age Celtic Hallstatt culture became influential, replacing the Hilversum culture. Iron ore brought a measure of prosperity, and was available throughout the country, including bog iron. Smiths travelled from settlement to settlement with bronze and iron, fabricating tools on demand. The King's grave of Oss (700 BC) was found in a burial mound, the largest of its kind in western Europe and containing an iron sword with an inlay of gold and coral.

The deteriorating climate in Scandinavia around 850 BC, that further deteriorated around 650 BC, might have triggered migration of Germanic tribes from the North. By the time this migration was complete, around 250 BC, a few general cultural and linguistic groups had emerged.[39][40] The North Sea Germanic Ingvaeones inhabited the northern part of the Low Countries. They would later develop into the Frisii and the early Saxons.[40] A second grouping, the Weser-Rhine Germanic (or Istvaeones), extended along the middle Rhine and Weser and inhabited the Low Countries south of the great rivers. This group consisted of tribes that would eventually develop into the Salian Franks.[40] Also the Celtic La Tène culture (c. 450 BC up to the Roman conquest) had expanded over a wide range, including the southern area of the Low Countries. Some scholars have speculated that even a third ethnic identity and language, neither Germanic nor Celtic, survived in the Netherlands until the Roman period, the Iron Age Nordwestblock culture,[41][42] that eventually was being absorbed by the Celts to the south and the Germanic peoples from the east.


Rhine Frontier of around 70 AD
During the Gallic Wars, the area south and west of the Rhine was conquered by Roman forces under Julius Caesar from 57 BC to 53 BC.[42] Caesar describes two main Celtic tribes living in what is now the southern Netherlands: the Menapii and the Eburones. The Rhine became fixed as Rome's northern frontier around 12 AD. Notable towns would arise along the Limes Germanicus: Nijmegen and Voorburg. At first part of Gallia Belgica, the area south of the Limes became part of the Roman province of Germania Inferior. The area to the north of the Rhine, inhabited by the Frisii, remained outside Roman rule (but not its presence and control), while the Germanic border tribes of the Batavi and Cananefates served in the Roman cavalry.[43] The Batavi rose against the Romans in the Batavian rebellion of 69 AD, but were eventually defeated. The Batavi later merged with other tribes into the confederation of the Salian Franks, whose identity emerged at the first half of the third century.[44] Salian Franks appear in Roman texts as both allies and enemies. They were forced by the confederation of the Saxons from the east to move over the Rhine into Roman territory in the fourth century. From their new base in West Flanders and the Southwest Netherlands, they were raiding the English Channel. Roman forces pacified the region, but did not expel the Franks, who continued to be feared at least until the time of Julian the Apostate (358), when Salian Franks were allowed to settle as foederati in Toxandria.[44] After deteriorating climate conditions and the Romans withdrawal, the Frisii disappeared from the northern Netherlands, probably forced to resettle within Roman territory as laeti in c. 296. Coastal lands remained largely unpopulated for the next two centuries.[45]

Early Middle Ages (411–1000)[edit]
Main articles: Frankish Kingdom and Frisian Kingdom

Franks, Frisians and Saxons (710s AD)
After Roman government in the area collapsed, the Franks expanded their territories in numerous kingdoms. By the 490s, Clovis I had conquered and united all these territories in the southern Netherlands in one Frankish kingdom, and from there continued his conquests into Gaul. During this expansion, Franks migrating to the south eventually adopted the Vulgar Latin of the local population.[40] A widening cultural divide grew with the Franks remaining in their original homeland in the north (i.e. southern Netherlands and Flanders), who kept on speaking Old Frankish, which by the ninth century had evolved into Old Low Franconian or Old Dutch.[40] A Dutch-French language boundary came into existence.[40][46]


Frankish expansion (481 to 870 AD)
To the north of the Franks, climatic conditions on the coast improved, and during the Migration Period the abandoned land was resettled again, mostly by Saxons, but also by the closely related Angles, Jutes and ancient Frisii.[47] Many moved on to England and came to be known as Anglo-Saxons, but those who stayed would be referred to as Frisians and their language as Frisian, named after the land that was once inhabited by Frisii.[47] Frisian was spoken along the entire southern North Sea coast, and it is still the language most closely related to English among the living languages of continental Europe. By the seventh century a Frisian Kingdom (650–734) under King Aldegisel and King Redbad emerged with Utrecht as its centre of power,[47][48] while Dorestad was a flourishing trading place.[49][50] Between 600 and around 719 the cities were often fought over between the Frisians and the Franks. In 734, at the Battle of the Boarn, the Frisians were defeated after a series of wars. With the approval of the Franks, the Anglo-Saxon missionary Willibrord converted the Frisian people to Christianity. He established the Archdiocese of Utrecht and became bishop of the Frisians. However, his successor Boniface was murdered by the Frisians in Dokkum, in 754.


Rorik of Dorestad, Viking ruler of Friesland (romantic 1912 depiction)

Lotharingia after 959 with the language border dotted in red
The Frankish Carolingian empire modeled itself after the Roman Empire and controlled much of Western Europe. However, as of 843, it was divided into three parts—East, Middle, and West Francia. Most of present-day Netherlands became part of Middle Francia, which was a weak kingdom and subject of numerous partitions and annexation attempts by its stronger neighbours. It comprised territories from Frisia in the north to the Kingdom of Italy in the south. Around 850, Lothair I of Middle Francia acknowledged the Viking Rorik of Dorestad as ruler of most of Frisia.[51] When the kingdom of Middle Francia was partitioned in 855, the lands north of the Alps passed to Lothair II and consecutively were named Lotharingia. After he died in 869, Lotharingia was partitioned, into Upper and Lower Lotharingia, the latter part comprising the Low Countries that technically became part of East Francia in 870, although it was effectively under the control of Vikings, who raided the largely defenceless Frisian and Frankish towns lying on the Frisian coast and along the rivers. Around 879, another Viking raided the Frisian lands, Godfrid, Duke of Frisia. The Viking raids made the sway of French and German lords in the area weak. Resistance to the Vikings, if any, came from local nobles, who gained in stature as a result, and that lay the basis for the disintegration of Lower Lotharingia into semi-independent states. One of these local nobles was Gerolf of Holland, who assumed lordship in Frisia after he helped to assassinate Godfrid, and Viking rule came to an end.

High Middle Ages (1000–1384)[edit]
Main article: History of urban centers in the Low Countries
The Holy Roman Empire (the successor state of East Francia and then Lotharingia) ruled much of the Low Countries in the 10th and 11th century, but was not able to maintain political unity. Powerful local nobles turned their cities, counties and duchies into private kingdoms, that felt little sense of obligation to the emperor. Holland, Hainaut, Flanders, Gelre, Brabant, and Utrecht were in a state of almost continual war or paradoxically formed personal unions. The language and culture of most of the people who lived in the County of Holland were originally Frisian. As Frankish settlement progressed from Flanders and Brabant, the area quickly became Old Low Franconian (or Old Dutch). The rest of Frisia in the north (now Friesland and Groningen) continued to maintain its independence and had its own institutions (collectively called the "Frisian freedom") and resented the imposition of the feudal system.

Around 1000 AD, due to several agricultural developments, the economy started to develop at a fast pace, and the higher productivity allowed workers to farm more land or to become tradesmen. Towns grew around monasteries and castles, and a mercantile middle class began to develop in these urban areas, especially in Flanders and later also Brabant. Wealthy cities started to buy certain privileges for themselves from the sovereign. In practice, this meant that Brugge and Antwerp became quasi-independent republics in their own right and would later develop into some of the most important cities and ports in Europe.

Around 1100 AD, farmers from Flanders and Utrecht began draining and cultivating uninhabited swampy land in the western Netherlands, and made the emergence of the County of Holland as center of power possible. The title of Count of Holland were fought over in the Hook and Cod Wars (Dutch: Hoekse en Kabeljauwse twisten) between 1350 and 1490. The Cod faction consisted of the more progressive cities, while the Hook faction consisted of the conservative noblemen. These noblemen invited the Duke Philip the Good of Burgundy – who was also Count of Flanders – to conquer Holland.

Burgundian and Habsburg Netherlands (1384–1581)[edit]
Main articles: Burgundian Netherlands and Habsburg Netherlands

The Four Days' Battle, 1–4 June 1666 (Second Anglo–Dutch War) by Pieter Cornelisz van Soest

The Low Countries in the late 14th century
Most of the Imperial and French fiefs in what is now the Netherlands and Belgium were united in a personal union by Philip the Good, duke of Burgundy in 1433. The House of Valois-Burgundy and their Habsburg heirs would rule the Low Countries in the period from 1384 to 1581. Before the Burgundian union, the Dutch identified themselves by the town they lived in or their local duchy or county. The Burgundian period is when the road to nationhood began. The new rulers defended Dutch trading interests, which then developed rapidly. The fleets of the County of Holland defeated the fleets of the Hanseatic League several times. Amsterdam grew and in the 15th century became the primary trading port in Europe for grain from the Baltic region. Amsterdam distributed grain to the major cities of Belgium, Northern France and England. This trade was vital, because Holland could no longer produce enough grain to feed itself. Land drainage had caused the peat of the former wetlands to reduce to a level that was too low for drainage to be maintained.


William I, Prince of Orange (William the Silent), leader of the Dutch Revolt
Under Habsburg Charles V, ruler of the Holy Roman Empire and King of Spain, all fiefs in the current Netherlands region were united into the Seventeen Provinces, which also included most of present-day Belgium, Luxembourg, and some adjacent land in what is now France and Germany. In 1568, the Eighty Years' War between the Provinces and their Spanish ruler began. In 1579, the northern half of the Seventeen Provinces forged the Union of Utrecht in which they committed to support each other in their defence against the Spanish army.[52] The Union of Utrecht is seen as the foundation of the modern Netherlands. In 1581, the northern provinces adopted the Act of Abjuration, the declaration of independence in which the provinces officially deposed Philip II of Spain as reigning monarch in the northern provinces.[53]

The Protestant Queen Elizabeth I of England sympathised with the Dutch struggle against the Spanish, and sent an army of 7,600 soldiers to aid the Dutch in their war with the Catholic Spanish.[54] The English army under command of Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester was of no real benefit to the Dutch rebellion.[55] Philip II, the son of Charles V, was not prepared to let them go easily, and war continued until 1648, when Spain under King Philip IV finally recognised the independence of the seven north-western provinces in the Peace of Münster. Parts of the southern provinces became de facto colonies of the new republican-mercantile empire.

Dutch Republic (1581–1795)[edit]
Main articles: Dutch Republic and Evolution of the Dutch Empire
After declaring their independence, the provinces of Holland, Zeeland, Groningen, Friesland, Utrecht, Overijssel, and Gelderland formed a confederation. All these duchies, lordships and counties were autonomous and had their own government, the States-Provincial. The States General, the confederal government, were seated in The Hague and consisted of representatives from each of the seven provinces. The sparsely populated region of Drenthe was part of the republic too, although it was not considered one of the provinces. Moreover, the Republic had come to occupy during the Eighty Years' War a number of so-called Generality Lands in Flanders, Brabant and Limburg. Their population was mainly Roman Catholic, and these areas did not have a governmental structure of their own, and were used as a buffer zone between the Republic and the Spanish-controlled Southern Netherlands.[56]


Winter landscape with skaters near the city of Kampen by Hendrick Avercamp (1620s)

Amsterdam's Dam Square in 1656
In the Dutch Golden Age, spanning much of the 17th century, the Dutch Empire grew to become one of the major seafaring and economic powers, alongside Portugal, Spain, France and England. Science, military, and art (especially painting) were among the most acclaimed in the world. By 1650, the Dutch owned 16,000 merchant ships.[57] The Dutch East India Company and the Dutch West India Company established colonies and trading posts all over the world, including ruling the northern parts of Taiwan between 1624–1662 and 1664–1667. The Dutch settlement in North America began with the founding of New Amsterdam on the southern part of Manhattan in 1614. In South Africa, the Dutch settled the Cape Colony in 1652. Dutch colonies in South America were established along the many rivers in the fertile Guyana plains, among them Colony of Surinam (now Suriname). In Asia, the Dutch established the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia), and the only western trading post in Japan, Dejima.

Many economic historians regard the Netherlands as the first thoroughly capitalist country in the world. In early modern Europe it had the wealthiest trading city (Amsterdam) and the first full-time stock exchange. The inventiveness of the traders led to insurance and retirement funds as well as phenomena such as the boom-bust cycle, the world's first asset-inflation bubble, the tulip mania of 1636–1637, and the world's first bear raider, Isaac le Maire, who forced prices down by dumping stock and then buying it back at a discount.[58] In 1672 – known in Dutch history as the Rampjaar (Disaster Year) – the Dutch Republic was at war with France, England and three German Bishoprics simultaneously. At sea it could successfully prevent the English and French navy entering the western shores. On land, however, it was almost taken over internally by the advancing French and German armies coming from the east. It managed to turn the tide by inundating parts of Holland, but could never recover to its former glory again and went into a state of general decline in the 18th century, with economic competition from England and long-standing rivalries between the two main factions in Dutch society, the republican Staatsgezinden and the supporters of the stadtholder the Prinsgezinden, as main political factions.[59]

Batavian Republic and kingdom (1795–1890)[edit]
Main articles: Batavian Republic, Kingdom of Holland, United Kingdom of the Netherlands, and Kingdom of the Netherlands
With the armed support of revolutionary France, Dutch republicans proclaimed the Batavian Republic, modelled after the French Republic and rendering the Netherlands a unitary state on 19 January 1795. The stadtholder William V of Orange had fled to England. But from 1806 to 1810, the Kingdom of Holland was set up by Napoleon Bonaparte as a puppet kingdom governed by his brother Louis Bonaparte to control the Netherlands more effectively. However, King Louis Bonaparte tried to serve Dutch interests instead of his brother's, and he was forced to abdicate on 1 July 1810. The Emperor sent in an army and the Netherlands became part of the French Empire until the autumn of 1813, when Napoleon was defeated in the Battle of Leipzig.


A map of the Dutch colonial empire. Light green: territories administered by or originating from territories administered by the Dutch East India Company; dark green: the Dutch West India Company. In yellow the territories occupied later, during the 19th century.
William Frederick, son of the last stadtholder, returned to the Netherlands in 1813 and proclaimed himself Sovereign Prince of the Netherlands. Two years later, the Congress of Vienna added the southern Netherlands to the north to create a strong country on the northern border of France. William Frederick raised this United Netherlands to the status of a kingdom and proclaimed himself King William I. In addition, William became hereditary Grand Duke of Luxembourg in exchange for his German possessions. However, the Southern Netherlands had been culturally separate from the north since 1581, and rebelled. The south gained independence in 1830 as Belgium (recognised by the Northern Netherlands in 1839 as the Kingdom of the Netherlands was created by decree), while the personal union between Luxembourg and the Netherlands was severed in 1890, when William III died with no surviving male heirs. Ascendancy laws prevented his daughter Queen Wilhelmina from becoming the next Grand Duchess.


The submission of Diponegoro to General De Kock at the end of the Java War in 1830; painting by Nicolaas Pieneman
The Belgian Revolution at home and the Java War in the Dutch East Indies brought the Netherlands to the brink of bankruptcy. However, the Cultivation System was introduced in 1830; in the Dutch East Indies, 20% of village land had to be devoted to government crops for export. The policy brought the Dutch enormous wealth and made the colony self-sufficient. On the other hand, the colonies in the West Indies (Dutch Guiana and Curaçao and Dependencies), relied heavily on African slaves in which the Dutch part is estimated at 5–7 percent, or more than half a million Africans. The Netherlands abolished slavery in 1863.[60] Furthermore, slaves in Suriname would be fully free only in 1873, since the law stipulated that there was to be a mandatory 10-year transition.[61] The Dutch were also one of the last European countries to industrialise, in the second half of the 19th century.

World wars and beyond (1890–present)[edit]
Main articles: History of the Netherlands (1900–present), The Netherlands in World War I, and Netherlands in World War II

Rotterdam after German air raids in 1940
The Netherlands were able to remain neutral during World War I, in part because the import of goods through the Netherlands proved essential to German survival, until the blockade by the British Royal Navy in 1916.[62] That changed in World War II, when Nazi Germany invaded the Netherlands on 10 May 1940. The Rotterdam Blitz forced the main element of the Dutch army to surrender four days later. During the occupation, over 100,000 Dutch Jews[63] were rounded up, with the help of a lot of Dutchmen, and transported to Nazi extermination camps. Only a few of them survived. Dutch workers were conscripted for forced labour in Germany, civilians who resisted were killed in reprisal for attacks on German soldiers, and the countryside was plundered for food. Although there were thousands of Dutch who risked their lives by hiding Jews from the Germans, over 20,000 Dutch fascists joined the Waffen SS,[64] fighting on the Eastern Front.[65] Political collaborators were members of the fascist NSB, the only legal political party in the occupied Netherlands. On 8 December 1941, the Dutch government-in-exile in London declared war on Japan,[66] but could not prevent the Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies (Indonesia).[67] In 1944–45, the First Canadian Army, which included Canadian, British and Polish troops, was responsible for liberating much of the Netherlands.[68] But soon after VE Day, the Dutch fought a colonial war against the new Republic of Indonesia.


Former Prime Ministers Wim Kok, Dries van Agt, Piet de Jong, Ruud Lubbers and Jan Peter Balkenende with Prime Minister Mark Rutte, in 2011
In 1954, the Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands reformed the political structure of the Netherlands, which was a result of international pressure to carry out decolonisation. The Dutch colonies of Surinam and Curaçao and Dependencies and the European country all became countries within the Kingdom, on a basis of equality. Indonesia had declared its independence in August 1945 (recognised in 1949), and thus was never part of the reformed Kingdom. Suriname followed in 1975. After the war the Netherlands left behind an era of neutrality and gained closer ties with neighboring states. The Netherlands was one of the founding members of the Benelux, the NATO, Euratom and the European Coal and Steel Community, which would evolve into the EEC (Common Market) and later the European Union.

Government-encouraged emigration efforts to reduce population density prompted some 500,000 Dutch people to leave the country after the war.[69] The 1960s and 1970s were a time of great social and cultural change, such as rapid ontzuiling (end of pillarisation), a term that describes the decay of the old divisions along political and religious lines. Youths, and students in particular, rejected traditional mores and pushed for change in matters such as women's rights, sexuality, disarmament and environmental issues. In 2002, the euro was introduced as fiat money and in 2010, the Netherlands Antilles was dissolved. Referendums were held on each island to determine their future status. As a result, the islands of Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba (the BES islands) were to obtain closer ties with the Netherlands. This led to the incorporation of these three islands into the country of the Netherlands as special municipalities upon the dissolution of the Netherlands Antilles. The special municipalities are collectively known as the Caribbean Netherlands.

Geography[edit]
Main article: Geography of the Netherlands

A relief map of the Netherlands
The European area of the Netherlands lies between latitudes 50° and 54° N, and longitudes 3° and 8° E.

The Netherlands is geographically a very low and flat country, with about 26% of its area[70] and 21% of its population[71] located below sea level, and only about 50% of its land exceeding one metre above sea level.[15] The country is for the most part flat, with the exception of foothills in the far southeast, up to a height of no more than 321 metres, and some low hill ranges in the central parts. Most of the areas below sea level are man-made, caused by peat extraction or achieved through land reclamation. Since the late 16th century, large polder areas are preserved through elaborate drainage systems that include dikes, canals and pumping stations. Nearly 17% of the country's land area is reclaimed from the sea and from lakes.

Much of the country was originally formed by the estuaries of three large European rivers: the Rhine (Rijn), the Meuse (Maas) and the Scheldt (Schelde), as well as their tributaries. The south-western part of the Netherlands is to this day a river delta of these three rivers, the Rhine-Meuse-Scheldt delta.

The Netherlands is divided into north and south parts by the Rhine, the Waal, its main tributary branch, and the Meuse. In the past these rivers functioned as a natural barrier between fiefdoms and hence historically created a cultural divide, as is evident in some phonetic traits that are recognisable on either side of what the Dutch call their "Great Rivers" (de Grote Rivieren). Another significant branch of the Rhine, the IJssel river, discharges into Lake IJssel, the former Zuiderzee ('southern sea'). Just like the previous, this river forms a linguistic divide: people to the northeast of this river speak Dutch Low Saxon dialects (except for the province of Friesland, which has its own language).[72]

Floods[edit]
Main articles: Flood control in the Netherlands, Floods in the Netherlands, North Sea flood of 1953, and Storm tides of the North Sea

The Christmas flood of 1717 was the result of a northwesterly storm. In total, approximately 14,000 people drowned.
Over the centuries, the Dutch coastline has changed considerably as a result of natural disasters and human intervention. Most notable in terms of land loss was the storm of 1134, which created the archipelago of Zeeland in the south-west.

On 14 December 1287, St. Lucia's flood affected the Netherlands and Germany, killing more than 50,000 people in one of the most destructive floods in recorded history.[73] The St. Elizabeth flood of 1421 and the mismanagement in its aftermath destroyed a newly reclaimed polder, replacing it with the 72-square-kilometre (28 sq mi) Biesbosch tidal floodplains in the south-centre. The huge North Sea flood of early February 1953 caused the collapse of several dikes in the south-west of the Netherlands; more than 1,800 people drowned in the flood. The Dutch government subsequently instituted a large-scale programme, the "Delta Works", to protect the country against future flooding, which was completed over a period of more than thirty years.


Map illustrating areas of the Netherlands below sea level
The impact of disasters was to an extent increased through human activity. Relatively high-lying swampland was drained to be used as farmland. The drainage caused the fertile peat to contract and ground levels to drop, upon which groundwater levels were lowered to compensate for the drop in ground level, causing the underlying peat to contract further. Additionally, until the 19th century peat was mined, dried, and used for fuel, further exacerbating the problem. Centuries of extensive and poorly controlled peat extraction lowered an already low land surface by several metres. Even in flooded areas, peat extraction continued through turf dredging.


Zaanse Schans, a typical Dutch village built in an aquatic area
Because of the flooding, farming was difficult, which encouraged foreign trade, the result of which was that the Dutch were involved in world affairs since the early 14th/15th century.[74]


A polder at 5.53 metres below sea level
To guard against floods, a series of defences against the water were contrived. In the first millennium AD, villages and farmhouses were built on man-made hills called terps. Later, these terps were connected by dikes. In the 12th century, local government agencies called "waterschappen" ("water boards") or "hoogheemraadschappen" ("high home councils") started to appear, whose job it was to maintain the water level and to protect a region from floods; these agencies continue to exist. As the ground level dropped, the dikes by necessity grew and merged into an integrated system. By the 13th century windmills had come into use to pump water out of areas below sea level. The windmills were later used to drain lakes, creating the famous polders.[75]

In 1932 the Afsluitdijk ("Closure Dike") was completed, blocking the former Zuiderzee (Southern Sea) from the North Sea and thus creating the IJsselmeer (IJssel Lake). It became part of the larger Zuiderzee Works in which four polders totalling 2,500 square kilometres (965 sq mi) were reclaimed from the sea.[76][77]

The Netherlands is one of the countries that may suffer most from climate change. Not only is the rising sea a problem, but erratic weather patterns may cause the rivers to overflow.[78][79][80]

Delta Works[edit]
Main articles: Delta Works and Flood control in the Netherlands

The Delta Works are located in the provinces of South Holland and Zeeland.
After the 1953 disaster, the Delta Works were constructed, a comprehensive set of civil works throughout the Dutch coast. The project started in 1958 and was largely completed in 1997 with the completion of the Maeslantkering. New projects have been periodically started since to renovate and renew the Delta Works. A main goal of the Delta project was to reduce the risk of flooding in South Holland and Zeeland to once per 10,000 years (compared to 1 per 4000 years for the rest of the country). This was achieved by raising 3,000 kilometres (1,864 mi) of outer sea-dikes and 10,000 kilometres (6,214 mi) of inner, canal, and river dikes, and by closing off the sea estuaries of the Zeeland province. New risk assessments occasionally show problems requiring additional Delta project dike reinforcements. The Delta project is considered by the American Society of Civil Engineers as one of the seven wonders of the modern world.[81]


The Haringvlietdam, completed in 1971
It is anticipated that global warming in the 21st century will result in a rise in sea level. The Netherlands is actively preparing for a sea level rise. A politically neutral Delta Commission has formulated an action plan to cope with a sea level rise of 1.10 metres (3.6 ft) and a simultaneous land height decline of 10 centimetres (3.9 in). The plan encompasses the reinforcement of the existing coastal defenses like dikes and dunes with 1.30 metres (4.3 ft) of additional flood protection. Climate change will not only threaten the Netherlands from the sea side, but could also alter rain fall patterns and river run-off. To protect the country from river flooding, another program is already being executed. The Room for the River plan grants more flow space to rivers, protects the major populated areas and allows for periodic flooding of indefensible lands. The few residents who lived in these so-called "overflow areas" have been moved to higher ground, with some of that ground having been raised above anticipated flood levels.[82]

Climate[edit]
The predominant wind direction in the Netherlands is southwest, which causes a moderate maritime climate, with warm summers and cool winters, and typically high humidity. This is especially true close to the Dutch coastline, where the difference in temperature between summer and winter, as well as between day and night is noticeably smaller than it is in the southeast of the country.

The following tables are based on mean measurements by the KNMI weather station in De Bilt between 1981 and 2010:

[hide]Climate data for De Bilt (1981–2010 averages), all KNMI locations (1901–2011 extremes), snowy days: (1971–2000 averages).
Month	Jan	Feb	Mar	Apr	May	Jun	Jul	Aug	Sep	Oct	Nov	Dec	Year
Record high °C (°F)	17.2
(63)	20.4
(68.7)	25.6
(78.1)	32.2
(90)	35.6
(96.1)	37.2
(99)	38.2
(100.8)	38.6
(101.5)	35.2
(95.4)	30.1
(86.2)	22.0
(71.6)	17.8
(64)	38.6
(101.5)
Average high °C (°F)	5.6
(42.1)	6.4
(43.5)	10.0
(50)	14.0
(57.2)	18.0
(64.4)	20.4
(68.7)	22.8
(73)	22.6
(72.7)	19.1
(66.4)	14.6
(58.3)	9.6
(49.3)	6.1
(43)	14.1
(57.4)
Daily mean °C (°F)	3.1
(37.6)	3.3
(37.9)	6.2
(43.2)	9.2
(48.6)	13.1
(55.6)	15.6
(60.1)	17.9
(64.2)	17.5
(63.5)	14.5
(58.1)	10.7
(51.3)	6.7
(44.1)	3.7
(38.7)	10.1
(50.2)
Average low °C (°F)	0.3
(32.5)	0.2
(32.4)	2.3
(36.1)	4.1
(39.4)	7.8
(46)	10.5
(50.9)	12.8
(55)	12.3
(54.1)	9.9
(49.8)	6.9
(44.4)	3.6
(38.5)	1.0
(33.8)	6.0
(42.8)
Record low °C (°F)	-27.4
(-17.3)	-26.8
(-16.2)	-20.7
(-5.3)	-9.4
(15.1)	-5.4
(22.3)	-1.2
(29.8)	0.7
(33.3)	1.3
(34.3)	-3.7
(25.3)	-8.5
(16.7)	-14.4
(6.1)	-22.3
(-8.1)	-27.4
(-17.3)
Average precipitation mm (inches)	69.6
(2.74)	55.8
(2.197)	66.8
(2.63)	42.3
(1.665)	61.9
(2.437)	65.6
(2.583)	81.1
(3.193)	72.9
(2.87)	78.1
(3.075)	82.8
(3.26)	79.8
(3.142)	75.8
(2.984)	832.5
(32.776)
Average precipitation days (= 0.1 mm)	17	14	17	13	14	14	14	14	15	16	18	17	184
Average snowy days (= 0 cm)	6	6	4	2	0	–	–	–	–	0	2	5	25
Average relative humidity (%)	87	84	81	75	75	76	77	79	84	86	89	89	82
Mean monthly sunshine hours	62.3	85.7	121.6	173.6	207.2	193.9	206.0	187.7	138.3	112.9	63.0	49.3	1,601.5
Source: Knmi.nl[83]
Ice days—maximum temperature below 0 °C (32 °F)—usually occur from December until February, with the occasional rare ice day prior to or after that period. Freezing days—minimum temperature below 0 °C (32 °F)—occur much more often, usually ranging from mid-November to late March, but not rarely measured as early as mid-October and as late as mid-May. If one chooses the height of measurement to be 10 cm (4 in) above ground instead of 150 cm (59 in), one may even find such temperatures in the middle of the summer. On average, snow can occur from November to April, but sometimes occurs in May or October too.


Workum, Friesland
Warm days—maximum temperature above 20 °C (68 °F)—are usually found in April to October, but in some parts of the country these warm days can also occur in March, or even sometimes in November or February (usually not in De Bilt, however). Summer days—maximum temperature above 25 °C (77 °F)—are usually measured in De Bilt from May until September, tropical days—maximum temperature above 30 °C (86 °F)—are rare and usually occur only in June to August.

Precipitation throughout the year is distributed relatively equally each month. Summer and autumn months tend to gather a little more precipitation than the other months, mainly because of the intensity of the rainfall rather than the frequency of rain days (this is especially the case in summer, when lightning is also much more frequent).


Lisse, South Holland
The number of sunshine hours is affected by the fact that because of the geographical latitude, the length of the days varies between barely eight hours in December and nearly 17 hours in June.

Nature[edit]
Further information: List of national parks of the Netherlands and List of extinct animals of the Netherlands
The Netherlands has 20 national parks and hundreds of other nature reserves, that include lakes, heathland, woods, dunes and other habitats. Most of these are owned by Staatsbosbeheer, the national department for forestry and nature conservation and Natuurmonumenten (literally 'Natures monuments'), a private organisation that buys, protects and manages nature reserves. The Dutch part of the Wadden Sea in the north, with its tidal flats and wetlands, is rich in biological diversity, and was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Nature Site in 2009.


Common seals on Terschelling, a Wadden Sea island
The Oosterschelde, formerly the northeast estuary of the river Scheldt was designated a national park in 2002, thereby making it the largest national park in the Netherlands at an area of 370 square kilometres (140 sq mi). It consists primarily of the salt waters of the Oosterschelde, but also includes mud flats, meadows, and shoals. Because of the large variety of sea life, including unique regional species, the park is popular with Scuba divers. Other activities include sailing, fishing, cycling, and bird watching.

Phytogeographically, the Netherlands is shared between the Atlantic European and Central European provinces of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom. According to the World Wide Fund for Nature, the territory of the Netherlands belongs to the ecoregion of Atlantic mixed forests. In 1871, the last old original natural woods were cut down, and most woods today are planted monocultures of trees like Scots pine and trees that are not native to the Netherlands.[citation needed] These woods were planted on anthropogenic heaths and sand-drifts (overgrazed heaths) (Veluwe).

Caribbean islands[edit]
Main articles: Bonaire, Saba, and Sint Eustatius
While Curaçao, Aruba and Sint Maarten have a constituent country status, the Caribbean Netherlands are three islands designated as special municipalities of the Netherlands. The islands are part of the Lesser Antilles and have maritime borders with France (Saint Barthélemy and Saint Martin), the United Kingdom (Anguilla), Venezuela, Saint Kitts and Nevis and the United States (U.S. Virgin Islands).[84]


Underwater life of Klein Bonaire
Within this island group:

Bonaire is part of the ABC islands within the Leeward Antilles island chain off the Venezuelan coast. The Leeward Antilles have a mixed volcanic and coral origin.
Saba and Sint Eustatius are part of the SSS islands. They are located east of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands. Although in the English language they are considered part of the Leeward Islands, French, Spanish, Dutch and the English spoken locally consider them part of the Windward Islands. The Windward Islands are all of volcanic origin and hilly, leaving little ground suitable for agriculture. The highest point is Mount Scenery, 887 metres (2,910 ft), on Saba. This is the highest point in the country, and is also the highest point of the entire Kingdom of the Netherlands.
The islands of the Caribbean Netherlands enjoy a tropical climate with warm weather all year round. The Leeward Antilles are warmer and drier than the Windward islands. In summer, the Windward Islands can be subject to hurricanes.

Politics[edit]

The Binnenhof, where the lower and upper houses of the States General meet
The Netherlands has been a constitutional monarchy since 1815, and due to the efforts of Johan Rudolph Thorbecke, a parliamentary democracy since 1848. The Netherlands is described as a consociational state. Dutch politics and governance are characterised by an effort to achieve broad consensus on important issues, within both the political community and society as a whole. In 2010, The Economist ranked the Netherlands as the 10th most democratic country in the world.

The monarch is the head of state, at present King Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands. Constitutionally, the position is equipped with limited powers. By law, the King has the right to be periodically briefed and consulted on government affairs. Depending on the personalities and relationships of the King and the ministers, the monarch might have influence beyond the power granted by the Constitution of the Netherlands.


Willem-Alexander, King of the Netherlands since April 2013
The executive power is formed by the Council of Ministers, the deliberative organ of the Dutch cabinet. The cabinet usually consists of 13 to 16 ministers and a varying number of state secretaries. One to three ministers are ministers without portfolio. The head of government is the Prime Minister of the Netherlands, who often is the leader of the largest party of the coalition. The Prime Minister is a primus inter pares, with no explicit powers beyond those of the other ministers. Mark Rutte has been Prime Minister since October 2010; the Prime Minister had been the leader of the largest party continuously since 1973.

The cabinet is responsible to the bicameral parliament, the States General, which also has legislative powers. The 150 members of the House of Representatives, the lower house, are elected in direct elections on the basis of party-list proportional representation. These are held every four years, or sooner in case the cabinet falls (for example: when one of the chambers carries a motion of no confidence, the cabinet offers its resignation to the monarch). The States-Provincial are directly elected every four years as well. The members of the provincial assemblies elect the 75 members of the Senate, the upper house, which has the power to reject laws, but not propose or amend them. Both houses sent members to the Benelux Parliament, a consultative council.

Political culture[edit]
Both trade unions and employers organisations are consulted beforehand in policymaking in the financial, economic and social areas. They meet regularly with government in the Social-Economic Council. This body advises government and its advice cannot be put aside easily.

The Netherlands has a long tradition of social tolerance. In the 18th century, while the Dutch Reformed Church was the state religion, Catholicism, other forms of Protestantism, such as Baptists and Lutherans, and Judaism were tolerated but discriminated against.

In the late 19th century this Dutch tradition of religious tolerance transformed into a system of pillarisation, in which religious groups coexisted separately and only interacted at the level of government. This tradition of tolerance influences Dutch criminal justice policies on recreational drugs, prostitution, LGBT rights, euthanasia, and abortion, which are among the most liberal in the world.

Political parties[edit]
Main articles: Political parties of the Netherlands and Politics of the Netherlands

Mark Rutte, Prime Minister of the Netherlands since October 2010
Because of the multi-party system, no single party has held a majority in parliament since the 19th century, and coalition cabinets had to be formed. Since suffrage became universal in 1919, the Dutch political system has been dominated by three families of political parties: the strongest of which were the Christian democrats, currently represented by the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA); second were the social democrats, represented by the Labour Party (PvdA); and third were the liberals, of which the centre-right People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) is the main representative.

These parties co-operated in coalition cabinets in which the Christian democrats had always been a partner: so either a centre-left coalition of the Christian democrats and social democrats was ruling or a centre-right coalition of Christian democrats and liberals. In the 1970s, the party system became more volatile: the Christian democratic parties lost seats, while new parties became successful, such as the radical democrat and progressive liberal D66.

In the 1994 election, the CDA lost its dominant position. A "purple" cabinet was formed by VVD, D66, and PvdA. In the 2002 elections, this cabinet lost its majority, because of an increased support for the CDA and the rise of the right LPF, a new political party, around Pim Fortuyn, who was assassinated a week before the elections. A short-lived cabinet was formed by CDA, VVD, and LPF, which was led by the CDA leader Jan Peter Balkenende. After the 2003 elections, in which the LPF lost most of its seats, a cabinet was formed by CDA, VVD, and D66. The cabinet initiated an ambitious programme of reforming the welfare state, the healthcare system, and immigration policy.

In June 2006, the cabinet fell after D66 voted in favour of a motion of no confidence against the Minister of Immigration and Integration, Rita Verdonk, who had instigated an investigation of the asylum procedure of Ayaan Hirsi Ali, a VVD MP. A caretaker cabinet was formed by CDA and VVD, and general elections were held on 22 November 2006. In these elections, the CDA remained the largest party and the Socialist Party made the largest gains. The formation of a new cabinet took three months, resulting in a coalition of CDA, PvdA, and ChristianUnion.

On 20 February 2010, the cabinet fell when the PvdA refused to prolong the involvement of the Dutch Army in Uruzgan, Afghanistan.[85] Snap elections were held on 9 June 2010, with devastating results for the previously largest party, the CDA, which lost about half of its seats, resulting in 21 seats. The VVD became the largest party with 31 seats, closely followed by the PvdA with 30 seats. The big winner of the 2010 elections was Geert Wilders, whose right wing PVV,[86][87] the ideological successor to the LPF, more than doubled its number of seats.[88] Negotiation talks for a new government resulted in a minority government, led by VVD (a first) in coalition with CDA, which was sworn in on 14 October 2010. This unprecedented minority government was supported by PVV, but proved ultimately to be unstable,[89] when on 21 April 2012, Wilders, leader of PVV, unexpectedly 'torpedoed seven weeks of austerity talks' on new austerity measures, paving the way for early elections.[90][91][92]

VVD and PvdA were the big winners of the elections. Since 5 November 2012 they have formed the second Rutte cabinet.

Government[edit]
Main article: Government of the Netherlands
Administrative divisions[edit]
Main articles: Provinces of the Netherlands, Municipalities of the Netherlands, Water board (Netherlands), and Public body (Netherlands)

Provinces and special municipalities of the Netherlands
The Netherlands is divided into twelve provinces, each under a King's Commissioner (Commissaris van de Koning), except for Limburg province where the position is named Governor (Gouverneur) but has the same tasks. All provinces are divided into municipalities (gemeenten), of which there are 388 (2017).[93]

The country is also subdivided into 24 water districts, governed by a water board (waterschap or hoogheemraadschap), each having authority in matters concerning water management.[94] The creation of water boards actually pre-dates that of the nation itself, the first appearing in 1196. The Dutch water boards are among the oldest democratic entities in the world still in existence. Direct elections of the water boards take place every 4 years.

The administrative structure on the 3 BES islands, collectively known as the Caribbean Netherlands, is different. These islands have the status of openbare lichamen (public bodies) rather than municipalities and as administrative units are generally referred to as special municipalities. They are not part of a province.[95]

The Netherlands has several Belgian exclaves[96] and within those even several enclaves which are still part of the province of North Brabant. Because the Netherlands and Belgium are both in the Schengen Area, citizens of respective countries can travel through these enclaves.

Flag	Province	Capital	Largest city	Area[97]
(km2)	Population[98]
(2015)	Density
(per km2)
Drenthe	Drenthe	Assen	Assen	2,639	488,871	185
Flevoland	Flevoland	Lelystad	Almere	1,415	403,280	285
Friesland	Friesland	Leeuwarden	Leeuwarden	3,340	646,092	193
Gelderland	Gelderland	Arnhem	Nijmegen	4,970	2,031,123	409
Groningen (province)	Groningen	Groningen	Groningen	2,325	582,649	250
Limburg (Netherlands)	Limburg	Maastricht	Maastricht	2,150	1,115,805	519
North Brabant	North Brabant	's-Hertogenbosch	Eindhoven	4,914	2,495,107	507
North Holland	North Holland	Haarlem	Amsterdam	2,665	2,775,617	1,039
Overijssel	Overijssel	Zwolle	Enschede	3,324	1,142,360	344
Utrecht (province)	Utrecht	Utrecht	Utrecht	1,383	1,268,489	916
Zeeland	Zeeland	Middelburg	Middelburg	1,784	381,182	213
South Holland	South Holland	The Hague	Rotterdam	2,808	3,607,150	1,282
Total	33,718	16,922,460	512
Flag	Name	Capital	Largest city	Area[99]
(km2)	Population[100]
(2012)	Density
(per km2)
Bonaire	Bonaire	Kralendijk	Kralendijk	288	17,408	60
Sint Eustatius	Sint Eustatius	Oranjestad	Oranjestad	21	3,897	186
Saba	Saba	The Bottom	The Bottom	13	1,991	153
Total	322	23,296	72
Foreign relations[edit]

The Peace Palace (Vredespaleis), in The Hague
Main articles: Foreign relations of the Netherlands and List of diplomatic missions of the Netherlands
The history of Dutch foreign policy has been characterised by its neutrality. Since World War II, the Netherlands has become a member of a large number of international organisations, most prominently the UN, NATO and the EU. The Dutch economy is very open and relies strongly on international trade.

The foreign policy of the Netherlands is based on four basic commitments: to Atlantic co-operation, to European integration, to international development and to international law. One of the more controversial international issues surrounding the Netherlands is its liberal policy towards soft drugs.

During and after the Dutch Golden Age, the Dutch people built up a commercial and colonial empire. The most important colonies were present-day Suriname and Indonesia. Indonesia became independent after the Indonesian National Revolution in the 1940s following a war of independence, international pressure and several United Nations Security Council resolutions. Suriname became independent in 1975. The historical ties inherited from its colonial past still influence the foreign relations of the Netherlands. In addition, many people from these countries are living permanently in the Netherlands.

Military[edit]
Main article: Armed forces of the Netherlands

Lieutenant admiral Rob Bauer, highest commanding officer in the Netherlands
The Netherlands has one of the oldest standing armies in Europe; it was first established as such by Maurice of Nassau in the late 1500's. The Dutch army was used throughout the Dutch Empire. After the defeat of Napoleon, the Dutch army was transformed into a conscription army. The army was unsuccessfully deployed during the Belgian Revolution in 1830. After 1830, it was deployed mainly in the Dutch colonies, as the Netherlands remained neutral in European wars (including the First World War), until the Netherlands was invaded in World War II and quickly defeated by the Wehrmacht in May 1940.


Zr. Ms. Holland, a Royal Netherlands Navy offshore patrol vessel
The Netherlands abandoned its neutrality in 1948 when it signed the Treaty of Brussels, and became a founding member of NATO in 1949. The Dutch military was therefore part of the NATO strength in Cold War Europe, deploying its army to several bases in Germany. More than 3,000 Dutch soldiers were assigned to the 2nd Infantry Division of the United States Army during the Korean War. In 1996 conscription was suspended, and the Dutch army was once again transformed into a professional army. Since the 1990s the Dutch army has been involved in the Bosnian War and the Kosovo War, it held a province in Iraq after the defeat of Saddam Hussein, and it was engaged in Afghanistan.

The military is composed of four branches, all of which carry the prefix Koninklijke (Royal):

Koninklijke Landmacht (KL), the Royal Netherlands Army;
Koninklijke Marine (KM), the Royal Netherlands Navy, including the Naval Air Service and Marine Corps;
Koninklijke Luchtmacht (KLu), the Royal Netherlands Air Force;
Koninklijke Marechaussee (KMar), the Royal Marechaussee (Military Police), tasks include military police and border control.
Lieutenant admiral Rob Bauer is the current Commander of the Netherlands armed forces.

The submarine service are open to women as of 1 January 2017. The Korps Commandotroepen, the Special Operations Force of the Netherlands Army, is open to women, but because of the extremely high physical demands for initial training, it is almost impossible for women to become a commando.[101] The Dutch Ministry of Defence employs more than 70,000 personnel, including over 20,000 civilians and over 50,000 military personnel.[102] In April 2011 the government announced a major reduction in its military because of a cut in government expenditure, including a decrease in the number of tanks, fighter aircraft, naval ships and senior officials.[103]

Economy[edit]
Main article: Economy of the Netherlands

The Port of Rotterdam is Europe's largest port.
The Netherlands has a developed economy and has been playing a special role in the European economy for many centuries. Since the 16th century, shipping, fishing, agriculture, trade, and banking have been leading sectors of the Dutch economy. The Netherlands has a high level of economic freedom. The Netherlands is one of the top countries in the Global Enabling Trade Report (2nd in 2016), and was ranked the fifth most competitive economy in the world by the Swiss International Institute for Management Development in 2017.[104] In addition, the country was ranked the third most innovative in the world in the 2017 Global Innovation Index.[105]

As of 2013, the key trading partners of the Netherlands were Germany, Belgium, the United Kingdom, the United States, France, Italy, China and Russia.[106] The Netherlands is one of the world's 10 leading exporting countries. Foodstuffs form the largest industrial sector. Other major industries include chemicals, metallurgy, machinery, electrical goods, trade, services and tourism. Examples of international Dutch companies operating in Netherlands include Randstad, Unilever, Heineken, KLM, financial services (ING, ABN AMRO, Rabobank), chemicals (DSM, AKZO), petroleum refining (Royal Dutch Shell), electronical machinery (Philips, ASML), and satellite navigation (TomTom).

The Netherlands has the 17th-largest economy in the world, and ranks 10th in GDP (nominal) per capita. Between 1997 and 2000 annual economic growth (GDP) averaged nearly 4%, well above the European average. Growth slowed considerably from 2001 to 2005 with the global economic slowdown, but accelerated to 4.1% in the third quarter of 2007. In May 2013, inflation was at 2.8% per year.[107] In April 2013, unemployment was at 8.2% (or 6.7% following the ILO definition) of the labour force.[108] In April 2017, this was reduced to 5.1%.[109]

In Q3 and Q4 2011, the Dutch economy contracted by 0.4% and 0.7%, respectively, because of European Debt Crisis, while in Q4 the Eurozone economy shrunk by 0.3%.[110] The Netherlands also has a relatively low GINI coefficient of 0.326. Despite ranking 7th in GDP per capita, UNICEF ranked the Netherlands 1st in child well-being in rich countries, both in 2007 and in 2013.[111][112][113] On the Index of Economic Freedom Netherlands is the 13th most free market capitalist economy out of 157 surveyed countries.

Amsterdam is the financial and business capital of the Netherlands.[114] The Amsterdam Stock Exchange (AEX), part of Euronext, is the world's oldest stock exchange and is one of Europe's largest bourses. It is situated near Dam Square in the city's centre. As a founding member of the euro, the Netherlands replaced (for accounting purposes) its former currency, the "gulden" (guilder), on 1 January 1999, along with 15 other adopters of the euro. Actual euro coins and banknotes followed on 1 January 2002. One euro was equivalent to 2.20371 Dutch guilders. In the Caribbean Netherlands, the United States dollar is used instead of the euro.


The Netherlands is part of a monetary union, the Eurozone (dark blue), and of the EU single market.
The Dutch location gives it prime access to markets in the UK and Germany, with the Port of Rotterdam being the largest port in Europe. Other important parts of the economy are international trade (Dutch colonialism started with co-operative private enterprises such as the Dutch East India Company), banking and transport. The Netherlands successfully addressed the issue of public finances and stagnating job growth long before its European partners. Amsterdam is the 5th-busiest tourist destination in Europe with more than 4.2 million international visitors.[115] Since the enlargement of the EU large numbers of migrant workers have arrived in the Netherlands from Central and Eastern Europe.[116]

Of economic importance is BrabantStad, a partnership between the municipalities of Breda, Eindhoven, Helmond, 's-Hertogenbosch and Tilburg and the province of North Brabant. BrabantStad is the fastest growing economic region in the Netherlands, with the Brabantse Stedenrij (polycentric city region) as one of the national top regions, behind the Randstad megalopolis (Amsterdam, Rotterdam, The Hague and Utrecht).[117] The partnership in North Brabant aims to form an urban network and to make the province explicitly known as a leading knowledge region within Europe. With a total of 1.5 million people and 20% of the industrial production in the Netherlands is BrabantStad one of the major economical important, metropolitan regions of the Netherlands. Of all the money that goes to research and development in the Netherlands, one third is spent in Eindhoven. A quarter of the jobs in the region are in technology and ICT.[118]

Of all European patent applications in the field of physics and electronics about eight per cent is from North Brabant.[119] In the extended region, BrabantStad is part of the Eindhoven-Leuven-Aachen Triangle (ELAT). This economic cooperation agreement between three cities in three countries has created one of the most innovative regions in the European Union (measured in terms of money invested in technology and knowledge economy).[120] The economic success of this region is important for the international competitiveness of the Netherlands; Amsterdam, Rotterdam, and Eindhoven form together the foundation of the Dutch economy.[121]

The Netherlands continues to be one of the leading European nations for attracting foreign direct investment and is one of the five largest investors in the United States. The economy experienced a slowdown in 2005, but in 2006 recovered to the fastest pace in six years on the back of increased exports and strong investment. The pace of job growth reached 10-year highs in 2007. The Netherlands is the fourth-most competitive economy in the world, according to the World Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness Report.[122]

Natural gas[edit]

Natural gas concessions in the Netherlands. Today the Netherlands accounts for more than 25% of all Natural Gas reserves in the EU.
Beginning in the 1950s, the Netherlands discovered huge natural gas resources. The sale of natural gas generated enormous revenues for the Netherlands for decades, adding hundreds of billions of euros to the government's budget.[123] However, the unforeseen consequences of the country's huge energy wealth impacted the competitiveness of other sectors of the economy, leading to the theory of Dutch disease.[123]

Apart from coal and gas, the country has no mining resources. The last coal mine was closed in 1974. The Groningen gas field, one of the largest natural gas fields in the world, is situated near Slochteren. Exploitation of this field has resulted in €159 billion in revenue since the mid-1970s.[124] The field is operated by government-owned Gasunie and output is jointly exploited by the government, Royal Dutch Shell, and Exxon Mobil through NAM (Nederlandse Aardolie Maatschappij). "Gas extraction has resulted in increasingly strong earth tremors, some measuring as much as 3.6 on the Richter magnitude scale. The cost of damage repairs, structural improvements to buildings, and compensation for home value decreases has been estimated at 6.5 billion euros. Around 35,000 homes are said to be affected."[125] The Netherlands have an estimated 25% of natural gas reserves in the EU.[126]

Agriculture[edit]

Cows near the city of Arnhem
The Dutch agricultural sector is highly mechanised, and has a strong focus on international exports. It employs about 4% of the Dutch labour force but produces large surpluses for the food-processing industry and accounts for 21 percent of the Dutch total export value.[127] The Dutch rank first in the European Union and second worldwide in value of agricultural exports, behind only the United States,[128] with exports earning €80.7 billion in 2014,[129] up from €75.4 billion in 2012.[17]

The Netherlands has, at some time in recent history, supplied one quarter of all of the world's exported tomatoes, and trade of one-third of the world's exports of chilis, tomatoes and cucumbers goes through the country. The Netherlands also exports one-fifteenth of the world's apples.[130]

Aside from that, a significant portion of Dutch agricultural exports consists of fresh-cut plants, flowers, and flower bulbs, with the Netherlands exporting two-thirds of the world's total.[130]

Transport[edit]
Main article: Transport in the Netherlands

A1 motorway, in Gelderland

Bike passage at Rotterdam Centraal station
Mobility on Dutch roads has grown continuously since the 1950s and now exceeds 200 billion km travelled per year,[131] three quarters of which are done by car.[132] Around half of all trips in the Netherlands are made by car, 25% by bicycle, 20% walking, and 5% by public transport.[132] With a total road network of 139,295 km, which includes 2,758 km of expressways,[133] the Netherlands has one of the densest road networks in the world—much denser than Germany and France, but still not as dense as Belgium.[134]

About 13% of all distance is travelled by public transport, the majority of which by train.[132] Like in many other European countries, the Dutch rail network of 3,013 route km is also rather dense.[135] The network is mostly focused on passenger rail services and connects all major towns and cities. Trains are frequent, with one or two trains per hour on lesser lines, two to four trains per hour on average, and up to eight trains an hour on the busiest lines.[136]


A regional train operated by the Nederlandse Spoorwegen
Cycling is a ubiquitous mode of transport in the Netherlands. Almost as many kilometres are covered by bicycle as by train.[132] The Dutch are estimated to have at least 18 million bicycles,[137][138] which makes more than one per capita, and twice as many as the circa 9 million motor vehicles on the road.[139] In 2013, the European Cyclists' Federation ranked both the Netherlands and Denmark as the most bike-friendly countries in Europe,[140] but more of the Dutch (36%) than of the Danes (23%) list the bike as their most frequent mode of transport on a typical day.[141][nb 2] Cycling infrastructure is comprehensive. Busy roads have received some 35,000 km of dedicated cycle tracks, physically segregated from motorised traffic.[144] Busy junctions are often equipped with bicycle-specific traffic lights. There are large bicycle parking facilities, particularly in city centres and at train stations.

The Port of Rotterdam is the largest port in Europe, with the rivers Meuse and Rhine providing excellent access to the hinterland upstream reaching to Basel, Switzerland, and into France. As of 2013, Rotterdam was the world's eighth largest container port handling 440.5 million metric tonnes of cargo annually.[145] The port's main activities are petrochemical industries and general cargo handling and transshipment. The harbour functions as an important transit point for bulk materials and between the European continent and overseas. From Rotterdam goods are transported by ship, river barge, train or road. In 2007, the Betuweroute, a new fast freight railway from Rotterdam to Germany, was completed.

Schiphol Airport, just southwest of Amsterdam, is the main international airport in the Netherlands, and the third busiest airport in Europe in terms of passengers. In 2016, the Royal Schiphol Group airports handled 70 million passengers.[146]

As part of its commitment to environmental sustainability, the Dutch government initiated a plan to establish over 200 recharging stations for electric vehicles across the country by 2015. The rollout will be undertaken by Switzerland-based power and automation company ABB and Dutch startup Fastned, and will aim to provide at least one station within a 50-kilometre radius (30 miles) from every home in the Netherlands.[147]

Demographics[edit]
Main article: Demographics of the Netherlands

The population of the Netherlands from 1900 to 2000
The Netherlands had an estimated population of 17,093,000 as of January 2017.[148] It is the most densely populated country in Europe, except for very small states like Monaco, Vatican City, San Marino, and Liechtenstein. It is the 63rd most populous country in the world. Between 1900 and 1950, the country's population almost doubled from 5.1 to 10 million. From 1950 to 2000, the population further increased, to 15.9 million, though this represented a lower rate of population growth.[149] The estimated growth rate in 2013 is 0.44%.[150]

The fertility rate in the Netherlands is 1.78 children per woman (2013 estimate[150]), which is high compared with many other European countries, but below the rate of 2.1 children per woman required for natural population replacement. Life expectancy is high in the Netherlands: 83.21 years for newborn girls and 78.93 for boys (2013 est.[150]). The country has a migration rate of 1.99 migrants per 1,000 inhabitants per year.[150]

The majority of the population of the Netherlands is ethnically Dutch. According to a 2005 estimate, the population was 80.9% Dutch, 2.4% Indonesian, 2.4% German, 2.2% Turkish, 2.0% Surinamese, 1.9% Moroccan, 0.8% Antillean and Aruban, and 7.4% others.[151] Some 150,000 to 200,000 people living in the Netherlands are expatriates, mostly concentrated in and around Amsterdam and The Hague, now constituting almost 10% of the population of these cities.[152][153]

The Dutch are the tallest people in the world,[154] with an average height of 1.81 metres (5 ft 11.3 in) for adult males and 1.67 metres (5 ft 5.7 in) for adult females in 2009.[155] People in the south are on average about 2 cm (0.8 inches) shorter than those in the north.


In Rotterdam almost half the population has an immigrant background.
According to Eurostat, in 2010 there were 1.8 million foreign-born residents in the Netherlands, corresponding to 11.1% of the total population. Of these, 1.4 million (8.5%) were born outside the EU and 0.428 million (2.6%) were born in another EU Member State.[156] On 21 November 2016, there were 3.8 million residents in the Netherlands with at least one foreign-born parent ("migration background").[157] Over half the young people in Amsterdam and Rotterdam have a non-western background.[158] Dutch people, or descendants of Dutch people, are also found in migrant communities worldwide, notably in Canada, Australia, South Africa and the United States. According to the 2006 US Census, more than 5 million Americans claim total or partial Dutch ancestry.[159] There are close to 3 million Dutch-descended Afrikaners living in South Africa.[160] In 1940, there were 290,000 Europeans and Eurasians in Indonesia,[161] but most have since left the country.[162]

The Netherlands is the 24th most densely populated country in the world, with 408.53 inhabitants per square kilometre (1,058/sq mi) or – if only the land area is counted (33,883 km2, 13,082 sq mi) – 500.89 inhabitants per square kilometre (1,297/sq mi).[163] When the land area of the provinces only is counted (33,718 km2, 13,019 sq mi), a number of 500 inhabitants per square kilometre (1,295/sq mi) was reached in the first half of 2014. The Randstad is the country's largest conurbation located in the west of the country and contains the four largest cities: Amsterdam in the province North Holland, Rotterdam and The Hague in the province South Holland, and Utrecht in the province Utrecht. The Randstad has a population of 7 million inhabitants and is the 5th largest metropolitan area in Europe. According to Dutch Central Statistics Bureau, in 2015, 28 percent of Dutch population had a spendable income above 40,000 euros (which does not include spendings on health care or education).[164]


Download free eBooks of classic literature, books and
novels at Planet eBook. Subscribe to our free eBooks blog
and email newsletter.
Frankenstein
By Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley
 Frankenstein
Letter 1
To Mrs. Saville, England
St. Petersburgh, Dec. 11th, 17—
You will rejoice to hear that no disaster has accompanied
the commencement of an enterprise which you have regarded
with such evil forebodings. I arrived here yesterday, and
my first task is to assure my dear sister of my welfare and
increasing confidence in the success of my undertaking.
I am already far north of London, and as I walk in the
streets of Petersburgh, I feel a cold northern breeze play
upon my cheeks, which braces my nerves and fills me
with delight. Do you understand this feeling? This breeze,
which has travelled from the regions towards which I am
advancing, gives me a foretaste of those icy climes. Inspirited
by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more
fervent and vivid. I try in vain to be persuaded that the
pole is the seat of frost and desolation; it ever presents itself
to my imagination as the region of beauty and delight.
There, Margaret, the sun is forever visible, its broad disk just
skirting the horizon and diffusing a perpetual splendour.
There—for with your leave, my sister, I will put some trust
in preceding navigators— there snow and frost are banished;
and, sailing over a calm sea, we may be wafted to
a land surpassing in wonders and in beauty every region
hitherto discovered on the habitable globe. Its productions 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 
and features may be without example, as the phenomena of
the heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered
solitudes. What may not be expected in a country of eternal
light? I may there discover the wondrous power which
attracts the needle and may regulate a thousand celestial
observations that require only this voyage to render their
seeming eccentricities consistent forever. I shall satiate my
ardent curiosity with the sight of a part of the world never
before visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted
by the foot of man. These are my enticements, and they are
sufficient to conquer all fear of danger or death and to induce
me to commence this labourious voyage with the joy
a child feels when he embarks in a little boat, with his holiday
mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river.
But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot
contest the inestimable benefit which I shall confer on all
mankind, to the last generation, by discovering a passage
near the pole to those countries, to reach which at present
so many months are requisite; or by ascertaining the secret
of the magnet, which, if at all possible, can only be effected
by an undertaking such as mine.
These reflections have dispelled the agitation with which
I began my letter, and I feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm
which elevates me to heaven, for nothing contributes
so much to tranquillize the mind as a steady purpose—a
point on which the soul may fix its intellectual eye. This
expedition has been the favourite dream of my early years.
I have read with ardour the accounts of the various voyages
which have been made in the prospect of arriving at the 
 Frankenstein
North Pacific Ocean through the seas which surround the
pole. You may remember that a history of all the voyages
made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of our
good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected,
yet I was passionately fond of reading. These volumes were
my study day and night, and my familiarity with them increased
that regret which I had felt, as a child, on learning
that my father’s dying injunction had forbidden my uncle to
allow me to embark in a seafaring life.
These visions faded when I perused, for the first time,
those poets whose effusions entranced my soul and lifted
it to heaven. I also became a poet and for one year lived in
a paradise of my own creation; I imagined that I also might
obtain a niche in the temple where the names of Homer and
Shakespeare are consecrated. You are well acquainted with
my failure and how heavily I bore the disappointment. But
just at that time I inherited the fortune of my cousin, and
my thoughts were turned into the channel of their earlier
bent.
Six years have passed since I resolved on my present
undertaking. I can, even now, remember the hour from
which I dedicated myself to this great enterprise. I commenced
by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied
the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea; I
voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep;
I often worked harder than the common sailors during the
day and devoted my nights to the study of mathematics, the
theory of medicine, and those branches of physical science
from which a naval adventurer might derive the greatest 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 
practical advantage. Twice I actually hired myself as an under-mate
in a Greenland whaler, and acquitted myself to
admiration. I must own I felt a little proud when my captain
offered me the second dignity in the vessel and entreated
me to remain with the greatest earnestness, so valuable did
he consider my services.
And now, dear Margaret, do I not deserve to accomplish
some great purpose? My life might have been passed in
ease and luxury, but I preferred glory to every enticement
that wealth placed in my path. Oh, that some encouraging
voice would answer in the affirmative! My courage and my
resolution is firm; but my hopes fluctuate, and my spirits
are often depressed. I am about to proceed on a long and
difficult voyage, the emergencies of which will demand all
my fortitude: I am required not only to raise the spirits of
others, but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are
failing.
This is the most favourable period for travelling in Russia.
They fly quickly over the snow in their sledges; the motion is
pleasant, and, in my opinion, far more agreeable than that
of an English stagecoach. The cold is not excessive, if you
are wrapped in furs— a dress which I have already adopted,
for there is a great difference between walking the deck and
remaining seated motionless for hours, when no exercise
prevents the blood from actually freezing in your veins. I
have no ambition to lose my life on the post-road between
St. Petersburgh and Archangel.
I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three
weeks; and my intention is to hire a ship there, which can 
 Frankenstein
easily be done by paying the insurance for the owner, and
to engage as many sailors as I think necessary among those
who are accustomed to the whale-fishing. I do not intend
to sail until the month of June; and when shall I return?
Ah, dear sister, how can I answer this question? If I succeed,
many, many months, perhaps years, will pass before
you and I may meet. If I fail, you will see me again soon, or
never.
Farewell, my dear, excellent Margaret. Heaven shower
down blessings on you, and save me, that I may again and
again testify my gratitude for all your love and kindness.
Your affectionate brother,
R. Walton
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 
Letter 2
To Mrs. Saville, England
Archangel, 28th March, 17—
How slowly the time passes here, encompassed as I am
by frost and snow! Yet a second step is taken towards my enterprise.
I have hired a vessel and am occupied in collecting
my sailors; those whom I have already engaged appear to be
men on whom I can depend and are certainly possessed of
dauntless courage.
But I have one want which I have never yet been able to
satisfy, and the absence of the object of which I now feel as
a most severe evil. I have no friend, Margaret: when I am
glowing with the enthusiasm of success, there will be none
to participate my joy; if I am assailed by disappointment,
no one will endeavour to sustain me in dejection. I shall
commit my thoughts to paper, it is true; but that is a poor
medium for the communication of feeling. I desire the company
of a man who could sympathize with me, whose eyes
would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear
sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a friend. I have no one
near me, gentle yet courageous, possessed of a cultivated as
well as of a capacious mind, whose tastes are like my own, to
approve or amend my plans. How would such a friend repair
the faults of your poor brother! I am too ardent in execution
and too impatient of difficulties. But it is a still greater evil 
 Frankenstein
to me that I am self-educated: for the first fourteen years
of my life I ran wild on a common and read nothing but
our Uncle Thomas’ books of voyages. At that age I became
acquainted with the celebrated poets of our own country;
but it was only when it had ceased to be in my power to
derive its most important benefits from such a conviction
that I perceived the necessity of becoming acquainted with
more languages than that of my native country. Now I am
twenty-eight and am in reality more illiterate than many
schoolboys of fifteen. It is true that I have thought more and
that my daydreams are more extended and magnificent, but
they want (as the painters call it) *keeping*; and I greatly
need a friend who would have sense enough not to despise
me as romantic, and affection enough for me to endeavour
to regulate my mind.
Well, these are useless complaints; I shall certainly find
no friend on the wide ocean, nor even here in Archangel,
among merchants and seamen. Yet some feelings, unallied
to the dross of human nature, beat even in these rugged
bosoms. My lieutenant, for instance, is a man of wonderful
courage and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory,
or rather, to word my phrase more characteristically, of advancement
in his profession. He is an Englishman, and in
the midst of national and professional prejudices, unsoftened
by cultivation, retains some of the noblest endowments
of humanity. I first became acquainted with him on board a
whale vessel; finding that he was unemployed in this city, I
easily engaged him to assist in my enterprise.
The master is a person of an excellent disposition and is 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 
remarkable in the ship for his gentleness and the mildness of
his discipline. This circumstance, added to his well-known
integrity and dauntless courage, made me very desirous to
engage him. A youth passed in solitude, my best years spent
under your gentle and feminine fosterage, has so refined
the groundwork of my character that I cannot overcome an
intense distaste to the usual brutality exercised on board
ship: I have never believed it to be necessary, and when I
heard of a mariner equally noted for his kindliness of heart
and the respect and obedience paid to him by his crew, I felt
myself peculiarly fortunate in being able to secure his services.
I heard of him first in rather a romantic manner, from
a lady who owes to him the happiness of her life. This, briefly,
is his story. Some years ago he loved a young Russian
lady of moderate fortune, and having amassed a considerable
sum in prize-money, the father of the girl consented
to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined
ceremony; but she was bathed in tears, and throwing herself
at his feet, entreated him to spare her, confessing at the
same time that she loved another, but that he was poor, and
that her father would never consent to the union. My generous
friend reassured the suppliant, and on being informed
of the name of her lover, instantly abandoned his pursuit.
He had already bought a farm with his money, on which
he had designed to pass the remainder of his life; but he bestowed
the whole on his rival, together with the remains of
his prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited
the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage
with her lover. But the old man decidedly refused, thinking 
10 Frankenstein
himself bound in honour to my friend, who, when he found
the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned until
he heard that his former mistress was married according
to her inclinations. ‘What a noble fellow!’ you will exclaim.
He is so; but then he is wholly uneducated: he is as silent
as a Turk, and a kind of ignorant carelessness attends him,
which, while it renders his conduct the more astonishing,
detracts from the interest and sympathy which otherwise
he would command.
Yet do not suppose, because I complain a little or because
I can conceive a consolation for my toils which I may never
know, that I am wavering in my resolutions. Those are
as fixed as fate, and my voyage is only now delayed until
the weather shall permit my embarkation. The winter has
been dreadfully severe, but the spring promises well, and it
is considered as a remarkably early season, so that perhaps
I may sail sooner than I expected. I shall do nothing rashly:
you know me sufficiently to confide in my prudence and
considerateness whenever the safety of others is committed
to my care.
I cannot describe to you my sensations on the near prospect
of my undertaking. It is impossible to communicate
to you a conception of the trembling sensation, half pleasurable
and half fearful, with which I am preparing to
depart. I am going to unexplored regions, to ‘the land of
mist and snow,’ but I shall kill no albatross; therefore do
not be alarmed for my safety or if I should come back to
you as worn and woeful as the ‘Ancient Mariner.’ You will
smile at my allusion, but I will disclose a secret. I have of-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 11
ten attributed my attachment to, my passionate enthusiasm
for, the dangerous mysteries of ocean to that production of
the most imaginative of modern poets. There is something
at work in my soul which I do not understand. I am practically
industrious—painstaking, a workman to execute with
perseverance and labour—but besides this there is a love for
the marvellous, a belief in the marvellous, intertwined in
all my projects, which hurries me out of the common pathways
of men, even to the wild sea and unvisited regions I am
about to explore.
But to return to dearer considerations. Shall I meet you
again, after having traversed immense seas, and returned
by the most southern cape of Africa or America? I dare not
expect such success, yet I cannot bear to look on the reverse
of the picture. Continue for the present to write to me by
every opportunity: I may receive your letters on some occasions
when I need them most to support my spirits. I love
you very tenderly. Remember me with affection, should you
never hear from me again.
Your affectionate brother,
Robert Walton
12 Frankenstein
Letter 3
To Mrs. Saville, England
July 7th, 17—
My dear Sister,
I write a few lines in haste to say that I am safe— and well
advanced on my voyage. This letter will reach England by a
merchantman now on its homeward voyage from Archangel;
more fortunate than I, who may not see my native land,
perhaps, for many years. I am, however, in good spirits: my
men are bold and apparently firm of purpose, nor do the
floating sheets of ice that continually pass us, indicating the
dangers of the region towards which we are advancing, appear
to dismay them. We have already reached a very high
latitude; but it is the height of summer, and although not
so warm as in England, the southern gales, which blow us
speedily towards those shores which I so ardently desire to
attain, breathe a degree of renovating warmth which I had
not expected.
No incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make
a figure in a letter. One or two stiff gales and the springing
of a leak are accidents which experienced navigators scarcely
remember to record, and I shall be well content if nothing
worse happen to us during our voyage.
Adieu, my dear Margaret. Be assured that for my own
sake, as well as yours, I will not rashly encounter danger. I 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 13
will be cool, persevering, and prudent.
But success *shall* crown my endeavours. Wherefore
not? Thus far I have gone, tracing a secure way over the
pathless seas, the very stars themselves being witnesses and
testimonies of my triumph. Why not still proceed over the
untamed yet obedient element? What can stop the determined
heart and resolved will of man?
My swelling heart involuntarily pours itself out thus. But
I must finish. Heaven bless my beloved sister!
R.W.
14 Frankenstein
Letter 4
To Mrs. Saville, England
August 5th, 17—
So strange an accident has happened to us that I cannot
forbear recording it, although it is very probable that you
will see me before these papers can come into your possession.
Last Monday (July 31st) we were nearly surrounded by
ice, which closed in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving her
the sea-room in which she floated. Our situation was somewhat
dangerous, especially as we were compassed round by
a very thick fog. We accordingly lay to, hoping that some
change would take place in the atmosphere and weather.
About two o’clock the mist cleared away, and we beheld,
stretched out in every direction, vast and irregular plains
of ice, which seemed to have no end. Some of my comrades
groaned, and my own mind began to grow watchful with
anxious thoughts, when a strange sight suddenly attracted
our attention and diverted our solicitude from our own situation.
We perceived a low carriage, fixed on a sledge and
drawn by dogs, pass on towards the north, at the distance
of half a mile; a being which had the shape of a man, but apparently
of gigantic stature, sat in the sledge and guided the
dogs. We watched the rapid progress of the traveller with
our telescopes until he was lost among the distant inequali-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 15
ties of the ice.
This appearance excited our unqualified wonder. We
were, as we believed, many hundred miles from any land;
but this apparition seemed to denote that it was not, in reality,
so distant as we had supposed. Shut in, however, by ice,
it was impossible to follow his track, which we had observed
with the greatest attention.
About two hours after this occurrence we heard the
ground sea, and before night the ice broke and freed our
ship. We, however, lay to until the morning, fearing to encounter
in the dark those large loose masses which float
about after the breaking up of the ice. I profited of this time
to rest for a few hours.
In the morning, however, as soon as it was light, I went
upon deck and found all the sailors busy on one side of the
vessel, apparently talking to someone in the sea. It was, in
fact, a sledge, like that we had seen before, which had drifted
towards us in the night on a large fragment of ice. Only one
dog remained alive; but there was a human being within it
whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel. He
was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant
of some undiscovered island, but a European. When I
appeared on deck the master said, ‘Here is our captain, and
he will not allow you to perish on the open sea.’
On perceiving me, the stranger addressed me in English,
although with a foreign accent. ‘Before I come on board
your vessel,’ said he, ‘will you have the kindness to inform
me whither you are bound?’
You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a 
16 Frankenstein
question addressed to me from a man on the brink of destruction
and to whom I should have supposed that my
vessel would have been a resource which he would not have
exchanged for the most precious wealth the earth can afford.
I replied, however, that we were on a voyage of discovery towards
the northern pole.
Upon hearing this he appeared satisfied and consented
to come on board. Good God! Margaret, if you had seen
the man who thus capitulated for his safety, your surprise
would have been boundless. His limbs were nearly frozen,
and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and suffering.
I never saw a man in so wretched a condition. We attempted
to carry him into the cabin, but as soon as he had quitted
the fresh air he fainted. We accordingly brought him back
to the deck and restored him to animation by rubbing him
with brandy and forcing him to swallow a small quantity.
As soon as he showed signs of life we wrapped him up in
blankets and placed him near the chimney of the kitchen
stove. By slow degrees he recovered and ate a little soup,
which restored him wonderfully.
Two days passed in this manner before he was able to
speak, and I often feared that his sufferings had deprived
him of understanding. When he had in some measure recovered,
I removed him to my own cabin and attended on
him as much as my duty would permit. I never saw a more
interesting creature: his eyes have generally an expression
of wildness, and even madness, but there are moments
when, if anyone performs an act of kindness towards him
or does him the most trifling service, his whole counte-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 17
nance is lighted up, as it were, with a beam of benevolence
and sweetness that I never saw equalled. But he is generally
melancholy and despairing, and sometimes he gnashes his
teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woes that oppresses
him.
When my guest was a little recovered I had great trouble
to keep off the men, who wished to ask him a thousand
questions; but I would not allow him to be tormented by
their idle curiosity, in a state of body and mind whose restoration
evidently depended upon entire repose. Once,
however, the lieutenant asked why he had come so far upon
the ice in so strange a vehicle.
His countenance instantly assumed an aspect of the
deepest gloom, and he replied, ‘To seek one who fled from
me.’
‘And did the man whom you pursued travel in the same
fashion?’
‘Yes.’
‘Then I fancy we have seen him, for the day before we
picked you up we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a
man in it, across the ice.’
This aroused the stranger’s attention, and he asked a
multitude of questions concerning the route which the demon,
as he called him, had pursued. Soon after, when he
was alone with me, he said, ‘I have, doubtless, excited your
curiosity, as well as that of these good people; but you are
too considerate to make inquiries.’
‘Certainly; it would indeed be very impertinent and inhuman
of me to trouble you with any inquisitiveness of 
18 Frankenstein
mine.’
‘And yet you rescued me from a strange and perilous situation;
you have benevolently restored me to life.’
Soon after this he inquired if I thought that the breaking
up of the ice had destroyed the other sledge. I replied that
I could not answer with any degree of certainty, for the ice
had not broken until near midnight, and the traveller might
have arrived at a place of safety before that time; but of this
I could not judge.
From this time a new spirit of life animated the decaying
frame of the stranger. He manifested the greatest eagerness
to be upon deck to watch for the sledge which had before
appeared; but I have persuaded him to remain in the cabin,
for he is far too weak to sustain the rawness of the atmosphere.
I have promised that someone should watch for him
and give him instant notice if any new object should appear
in sight.
Such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence
up to the present day. The stranger has gradually
improved in health but is very silent and appears uneasy
when anyone except myself enters his cabin. Yet his manners
are so conciliating and gentle that the sailors are all
interested in him, although they have had very little communication
with him. For my own part, I begin to love
him as a brother, and his constant and deep grief fills me
with sympathy and compassion. He must have been a noble
creature in his better days, being even now in wreck so attractive
and amiable.
I said in one of my letters, my dear Margaret, that I 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 19
should find no friend on the wide ocean; yet I have found
a man who, before his spirit had been broken by misery, I
should have been happy to have possessed as the brother of
my heart.
I shall continue my journal concerning the stranger at
intervals, should I have any fresh incidents to record.
August 13th, 17—
My affection for my guest increases every day. He excites
at once my admiration and my pity to an astonishing degree.
How can I see so noble a creature destroyed by misery
without feeling the most poignant grief? He is so gentle, yet
so wise; his mind is so cultivated, and when he speaks, although
his words are culled with the choicest art, yet they
flow with rapidity and unparalleled eloquence.
He is now much recovered from his illness and is continually
on the deck, apparently watching for the sledge
that preceded his own. Yet, although unhappy, he is not
so utterly occupied by his own misery but that he interests
himself deeply in the projects of others. He has frequently
conversed with me on mine, which I have communicated
to him without disguise. He entered attentively into all my
arguments in favour of my eventual success and into every
minute detail of the measures I had taken to secure it. I was
easily led by the sympathy which he evinced to use the language
of my heart, to give utterance to the burning ardour
of my soul, and to say, with all the fervour that warmed me,
how gladly I would sacrifice my fortune, my existence, my
every hope, to the furtherance of my enterprise. One man’s
life or death were but a small price to pay for the acquire-
20 Frankenstein
ment of the knowledge which I sought, for the dominion
I should acquire and transmit over the elemental foes of
our race. As I spoke, a dark gloom spread over my listener’s
countenance. At first I perceived that he tried to suppress
his emotion; he placed his hands before his eyes, and my
voice quivered and failed me as I beheld tears trickle fast
from between his fingers; a groan burst from his heaving
breast. I paused; at length he spoke, in broken accents: ‘Unhappy
man! Do you share my madness? Have you drunk
also of the intoxicating draught? Hear me; let me reveal my
tale, and you will dash the cup from your lips!’
Such words, you may imagine, strongly excited my curiosity;
but the paroxysm of grief that had seized the stranger
overcame his weakened powers, and many hours of repose
and tranquil conversation were necessary to restore his
composure.
Having conquered the violence of his feelings, he appeared
to despise himself for being the slave of passion;
and quelling the dark tyranny of despair, he led me again
to converse concerning myself personally. He asked me the
history of my earlier years. The tale was quickly told, but it
awakened various trains of reflection. I spoke of my desire
of finding a friend, of my thirst for a more intimate sympathy
with a fellow mind than had ever fallen to my lot, and
expressed my conviction that a man could boast of little
happiness who did not enjoy this blessing.
‘I agree with you,’ replied the stranger; ‘we are unfashioned
creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better,
dearer than ourselves— such a friend ought to be—do not 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 21
lend his aid to perfectionate our weak and faulty natures. I
once had a friend, the most noble of human creatures, and
am entitled, therefore, to judge respecting friendship. You
have hope, and the world before you, and have no cause for
despair. But I—I have lost everything and cannot begin life
anew.’
As he said this his countenance became expressive of a
calm, settled grief that touched me to the heart. But he was
silent and presently retired to his cabin.
Even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel more deeply
than he does the beauties of nature. The starry sky, the sea,
and every sight afforded by these wonderful regions seem
still to have the power of elevating his soul from earth. Such
a man has a double existence: he may suffer misery and be
overwhelmed by disappointments, yet when he has retired
into himself, he will be like a celestial spirit that has a halo
around him, within whose circle no grief or folly ventures.
Will you smile at the enthusiasm I express concerning
this divine wanderer? You would not if you saw him. You
have been tutored and refined by books and retirement
from the world, and you are therefore somewhat fastidious;
but this only renders you the more fit to appreciate the
extraordinary merits of this wonderful man. Sometimes I
have endeavoured to discover what quality it is which he
possesses that elevates him so immeasurably above any
other person I ever knew. I believe it to be an intuitive discernment,
a quick but never-failing power of judgment, a
penetration into the causes of things, unequalled for clearness
and precision; add to this a facility of expression and a 
22 Frankenstein
voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music.
August 19, 17—
Yesterday the stranger said to me, ‘You may easily
perceive, Captain Walton, that I have suffered great and unparalleled
misfortunes. I had determined at one time that
the memory of these evils should die with me, but you have
won me to alter my determination. You seek for knowledge
and wisdom, as I once did; and I ardently hope that the
gratification of your wishes may not be a serpent to sting
you, as mine has been. I do not know that the relation of
my disasters will be useful to you; yet, when I reflect that
you are pursuing the same course, exposing yourself to the
same dangers which have rendered me what I am, I imagine
that you may deduce an apt moral from my tale, one
that may direct you if you succeed in your undertaking and
console you in case of failure. Prepare to hear of occurrences
which are usually deemed marvellous. Were we among
the tamer scenes of nature I might fear to encounter your
unbelief, perhaps your ridicule; but many things will appear
possible in these wild and mysterious regions which
would provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the
ever-varied powers of nature; nor can I doubt but that my
tale conveys in its series internal evidence of the truth of the
events of which it is composed.’
You may easily imagine that I was much gratified by
the offered communication, yet I could not endure that he
should renew his grief by a recital of his misfortunes. I felt
the greatest eagerness to hear the promised narrative, partly
from curiosity and partly from a strong desire to ameliorate 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 23
his fate if it were in my power. I expressed these feelings in
my answer.
‘I thank you,’ he replied, ‘for your sympathy, but it is useless;
my fate is nearly fulfilled. I wait but for one event, and
then I shall repose in peace. I understand your feeling,’ continued
he, perceiving that I wished to interrupt him; ‘but
you are mistaken, my friend, if thus you will allow me to
name you; nothing can alter my destiny; listen to my history,
and you will perceive how irrevocably it is determined.’
He then told me that he would commence his narrative
the next day when I should be at leisure. This promise drew
from me the warmest thanks. I have resolved every night,
when I am not imperatively occupied by my duties, to record,
as nearly as possible in his own words, what he has
related during the day. If I should be engaged, I will at least
make notes. This manuscript will doubtless afford you the
greatest pleasure; but to me, who know him and who hear it
from his own lips—with what interest and sympathy shall
I read it in some future day! Even now, as I commence my
task, his full-toned voice swells in my ears; his lustrous eyes
dwell on me with all their melancholy sweetness; I see his
thin hand raised in animation, while the lineaments of his
face are irradiated by the soul within. Strange and harrowing
must be his story, frightful the storm which embraced
the gallant vessel on its course and wrecked it—thus!
24 Frankenstein
Chapter 1
I am by birth a Genevese, and my family is one of the
most distinguished of that republic. My ancestors had
been for many years counsellors and syndics, and my father
had filled several public situations with honour and
reputation. He was respected by all who knew him for his
integrity and indefatigable attention to public business. He
passed his younger days perpetually occupied by the affairs
of his country; a variety of circumstances had prevented his
marrying early, nor was it until the decline of life that he
became a husband and the father of a family.
As the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character,
I cannot refrain from relating them. One of his most
intimate friends was a merchant who, from a flourishing
state, fell, through numerous mischances, into poverty.
This man, whose name was Beaufort, was of a proud and
unbending disposition and could not bear to live in poverty
and oblivion in the same country where he had formerly
been distinguished for his rank and magnificence. Having
paid his debts, therefore, in the most honourable manner,
he retreated with his daughter to the town of Lucerne,
where he lived unknown and in wretchedness. My father
loved Beaufort with the truest friendship and was deeply
grieved by his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances.
He bitterly deplored the false pride which led his friend to 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 25
a conduct so little worthy of the affection that united them.
He lost no time in endeavouring to seek him out, with the
hope of persuading him to begin the world again through
his credit and assistance.
Beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself,
and it was ten months before my father discovered his
abode. Overjoyed at this discovery, he hastened to the house,
which was situated in a mean street near the Reuss. But
when he entered, misery and despair alone welcomed him.
Beaufort had saved but a very small sum of money from
the wreck of his fortunes, but it was sufficient to provide
him with sustenance for some months, and in the meantime
he hoped to procure some respectable employment in
a merchant’s house. The interval was, consequently, spent
in inaction; his grief only became more deep and rankling
when he had leisure for reflection, and at length it took so
fast hold of his mind that at the end of three months he lay
on a bed of sickness, incapable of any exertion.
His daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness,
but she saw with despair that their little fund was rapidly
decreasing and that there was no other prospect of support.
But Caroline Beaufort possessed a mind of an uncommon
mould, and her courage rose to support her in her adversity.
She procured plain work; she plaited straw and by various
means contrived to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to
support life.
Several months passed in this manner. Her father grew
worse; her time was more entirely occupied in attending
him; her means of subsistence decreased; and in the tenth 
26 Frankenstein
month her father died in her arms, leaving her an orphan
and a beggar. This last blow overcame her, and she knelt by
Beaufort’s coffin weeping bitterly, when my father entered
the chamber. He came like a protecting spirit to the poor
girl, who committed herself to his care; and after the interment
of his friend he conducted her to Geneva and placed
her under the protection of a relation. Two years after this
event Caroline became his wife.
There was a considerable difference between the ages of
my parents, but this circumstance seemed to unite them only
closer in bonds of devoted affection. There was a sense of
justice in my father’s upright mind which rendered it necessary
that he should approve highly to love strongly. Perhaps
during former years he had suffered from the late-discovered
unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to
set a greater value on tried worth. There was a show of gratitude
and worship in his attachment to my mother, differing
wholly from the doting fondness of age, for it was inspired
by reverence for her virtues and a desire to be the means of,
in some degree, recompensing her for the sorrows she had
endured, but which gave inexpressible grace to his behaviour
to her. Everything was made to yield to her wishes and
her convenience. He strove to shelter her, as a fair exotic is
sheltered by the gardener, from every rougher wind and to
surround her with all that could tend to excite pleasurable
emotion in her soft and benevolent mind. Her health, and
even the tranquillity of her hitherto constant spirit, had
been shaken by what she had gone through. During the two
years that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 27
had gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately
after their union they sought the pleasant climate
of Italy, and the change of scene and interest attendant on
a tour through that land of wonders, as a restorative for her
weakened frame.
From Italy they visited Germany and France. I, their
eldest child, was born at Naples, and as an infant accompanied
them in their rambles. I remained for several years
their only child. Much as they were attached to each other,
they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from
a very mine of love to bestow them upon me. My mother’s
tender caresses and my father’s smile of benevolent pleasure
while regarding me are my first recollections. I was
their plaything and their idol, and something better—their
child, the innocent and helpless creature bestowed on them
by heaven, whom to bring up to good, and whose future
lot it was in their hands to direct to happiness or misery,
according as they fulfilled their duties towards me. With
this deep consciousness of what they owed towards the being
to which they had given life, added to the active spirit
of tenderness that animated both, it may be imagined that
while during every hour of my infant life I received a lesson
of patience, of charity, and of self-control, I was so guided
by a silken cord that all seemed but one train of enjoyment
to me.
For a long time I was their only care. My mother had
much desired to have a daughter, but I continued their
single offspring. When I was about five years old, while
making an excursion beyond the frontiers of Italy, they 
28 Frankenstein
passed a week on the shores of the Lake of Como. Their
benevolent disposition often made them enter the cottages
of the poor. This, to my mother, was more than a duty;
it was a necessity, a passion—remembering what she had
suffered, and how she had been relieved—for her to act in
her turn the guardian angel to the afflicted. During one of
their walks a poor cot in the foldings of a vale attracted their
notice as being singularly disconsolate, while the number
of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury
in its worst shape. One day, when my father had gone by
himself to Milan, my mother, accompanied by me, visited
this abode. She found a peasant and his wife, hard working,
bent down by care and labour, distributing a scanty meal
to five hungry babes. Among these there was one which attracted
my mother far above all the rest. She appeared of a
different stock. The four others were dark-eyed, hardy little
vagrants; this child was thin and very fair. Her hair was the
brightest living gold, and despite the poverty of her clothing,
seemed to set a crown of distinction on her head. Her
brow was clear and ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her
lips and the moulding of her face so expressive of sensibility
and sweetness that none could behold her without looking
on her as of a distinct species, a being heaven-sent, and
bearing a celestial stamp in all her features.
The peasant woman, perceiving that my mother fixed
eyes of wonder and admiration on this lovely girl, eagerly
communicated her history. She was not her child, but the
daughter of a Milanese nobleman. Her mother was a German
and had died on giving her birth. The infant had been 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 29
placed with these good people to nurse: they were better off
then. They had not been long married, and their eldest child
was but just born. The father of their charge was one of those
Italians nursed in the memory of the antique glory of Italy—one
among the *schiavi ognor frementi*, who exerted
himself to obtain the liberty of his country. He became the
victim of its weakness. Whether he had died or still lingered
in the dungeons of Austria was not known. His property
was confiscated; his child became an orphan and a beggar.
She continued with her foster parents and bloomed in their
rude abode, fairer than a garden rose among dark-leaved
brambles.
When my father returned from Milan, he found playing
with me in the hall of our villa a child fairer than pictured
cherub— a creature who seemed to shed radiance from her
looks and whose form and motions were lighter than the
chamois of the hills. The apparition was soon explained.
With his permission my mother prevailed on her rustic
guardians to yield their charge to her. They were fond of the
sweet orphan. Her presence had seemed a blessing to them,
but it would be unfair to her to keep her in poverty and
want when Providence afforded her such powerful protection.
They consulted their village priest, and the result was
that Elizabeth Lavenza became the inmate of my parents’
house— my more than sister—the beautiful and adored
companion of all my occupations and my pleasures.
Everyone loved Elizabeth. The passionate and almost
reverential attachment with which all regarded her became,
while I shared it, my pride and my delight. On the evening 
30 Frankenstein
previous to her being brought to my home, my mother had
said playfully, ‘I have a pretty present for my Victor— tomorrow
he shall have it.’ And when, on the morrow, she
presented Elizabeth to me as her promised gift, I, with
childish seriousness, interpreted her words literally and
looked upon Elizabeth as mine—mine to protect, love, and
cherish. All praises bestowed on her I received as made to
a possession of my own. We called each other familiarly
by the name of cousin. No word, no expression could body
forth the kind of relation in which she stood to me—my
more than sister, since till death she was to be mine only.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 31
Chapter 2
We were brought up together; there was not quite a year
difference in our ages. I need not say that we were
strangers to any species of disunion or dispute. Harmony
was the soul of our companionship, and the diversity and
contrast that subsisted in our characters drew us nearer
together. Elizabeth was of a calmer and more concentrated
disposition; but, with all my ardour, I was capable of a
more intense application and was more deeply smitten with
the thirst for knowledge. She busied herself with following
the aerial creations of the poets; and in the majestic and
wondrous scenes which surrounded our Swiss home—the
sublime shapes of the mountains, the changes of the seasons,
tempest and calm, the silence of winter, and the life
and turbulence of our Alpine summers—she found ample
scope for admiration and delight. While my companion
contemplated with a serious and satisfied spirit the magnificent
appearances of things, I delighted in investigating
their causes. The world was to me a secret which I desired to
divine. Curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws
of nature, gladness akin to rapture, as they were unfolded
to me, are among the earliest sensations I can remember.
On the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years,
my parents gave up entirely their wandering life and fixed
themselves in their native country. We possessed a house 
32 Frankenstein
in Geneva, and a campagne on Belrive, the eastern shore of
the lake, at the distance of rather more than a league from
the city. We resided principally in the latter, and the lives
of my parents were passed in considerable seclusion. It was
my temper to avoid a crowd and to attach myself fervently
to a few. I was indifferent, therefore, to my school-fellows
in general; but I united myself in the bonds of the closest
friendship to one among them. Henry Clerval was the son
of a merchant of Geneva. He was a boy of singular talent
and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger
for its own sake. He was deeply read in books of chivalry
and romance. He composed heroic songs and began to
write many a tale of enchantment and knightly adventure.
He tried to make us act plays and to enter into masquerades,
in which the characters were drawn from the heroes
of Roncesvalles, of the Round Table of King Arthur, and the
chivalrous train who shed their blood to redeem the holy
sepulchre from the hands of the infidels.
No human being could have passed a happier childhood
than myself. My parents were possessed by the very spirit
of kindness and indulgence. We felt that they were not
the tyrants to rule our lot according to their caprice, but
the agents and creators of all the many delights which we
enjoyed. When I mingled with other families I distinctly
discerned how peculiarly fortunate my lot was, and gratitude
assisted the development of filial love.
My temper was sometimes violent, and my passions
vehement; but by some law in my temperature they were
turned not towards childish pursuits but to an eager de-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 33
sire to learn, and not to learn all things indiscriminately.
I confess that neither the structure of languages, nor the
code of governments, nor the politics of various states possessed
attractions for me. It was the secrets of heaven and
earth that I desired to learn; and whether it was the outward
substance of things or the inner spirit of nature and
the mysterious soul of man that occupied me, still my inquiries
were directed to the metaphysical, or in its highest
sense, the physical secrets of the world.
Meanwhile Clerval occupied himself, so to speak, with
the moral relations of things. The busy stage of life, the virtues
of heroes, and the actions of men were his theme; and
his hope and his dream was to become one among those
whose names are recorded in story as the gallant and adventurous
benefactors of our species. The saintly soul of
Elizabeth shone like a shrine-dedicated lamp in our peaceful
home. Her sympathy was ours; her smile, her soft voice,
the sweet glance of her celestial eyes, were ever there to
bless and animate us. She was the living spirit of love to
soften and attract; I might have become sullen in my study,
through the ardour of my nature, but that she was there
to subdue me to a semblance of her own gentleness. And
Clerval—could aught ill entrench on the noble spirit of
Clerval? Yet he might not have been so perfectly humane, so
thoughtful in his generosity, so full of kindness and tenderness
amidst his passion for adventurous exploit, had she not
unfolded to him the real loveliness of beneficence and made
the doing good the end and aim of his soaring ambition.
I feel exquisite pleasure in dwelling on the recollec-
34 Frankenstein
tions of childhood, before misfortune had tainted my mind
and changed its bright visions of extensive usefulness into
gloomy and narrow reflections upon self. Besides, in drawing
the picture of my early days, I also record those events
which led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for
when I would account to myself for the birth of that passion
which afterward ruled my destiny I find it arise, like a
mountain river, from ignoble and almost forgotten sources;
but, swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent which,
in its course, has swept away all my hopes and joys. Natural
philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate; I desire,
therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led to
my predilection for that science. When I was thirteen years
of age we all went on a party of pleasure to the baths near
Thonon; the inclemency of the weather obliged us to remain
a day confined to the inn. In this house I chanced to find a
volume of the works of Cornelius Agrippa. I opened it with
apathy; the theory which he attempts to demonstrate and
the wonderful facts which he relates soon changed this feeling
into enthusiasm. A new light seemed to dawn upon my
mind, and bounding with joy, I communicated my discovery
to my father. My father looked carelessly at the title page
of my book and said, ‘Ah! Cornelius Agrippa! My dear Victor,
do not waste your time upon this; it is sad trash.’
If, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains
to explain to me that the principles of Agrippa had been
entirely exploded and that a modern system of science had
been introduced which possessed much greater powers than
the ancient, because the powers of the latter were chimeri-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 35
cal, while those of the former were real and practical, under
such circumstances I should certainly have thrown Agrippa
aside and have contented my imagination, warmed as it
was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies.
It is even possible that the train of my ideas would never
have received the fatal impulse that led to my ruin. But the
cursory glance my father had taken of my volume by no
means assured me that he was acquainted with its contents,
and I continued to read with the greatest avidity. When I returned
home my first care was to procure the whole works
of this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus
Magnus. I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers
with delight; they appeared to me treasures known to few
besides myself. I have described myself as always having
been imbued with a fervent longing to penetrate the secrets
of nature. In spite of the intense labour and wonderful discoveries
of modern philosophers, I always came from my
studies discontented and unsatisfied. Sir Isaac Newton is
said to have avowed that he felt like a child picking up shells
beside the great and unexplored ocean of truth. Those of
his successors in each branch of natural philosophy with
whom I was acquainted appeared even to my boy’s apprehensions
as tyros engaged in the same pursuit.
The untaught peasant beheld the elements around him
and was acquainted with their practical uses. The most
learned philosopher knew little more. He had partially unveiled
the face of Nature, but her immortal lineaments were
still a wonder and a mystery. He might dissect, anatomize,
and give names; but, not to speak of a final cause, causes in 
36 Frankenstein
their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown
to him. I had gazed upon the fortifications and impediments
that seemed to keep human beings from entering the
citadel of nature, and rashly and ignorantly I had repined.
But here were books, and here were men who had penetrated
deeper and knew more. I took their word for all that
they averred, and I became their disciple. It may appear
strange that such should arise in the eighteenth century;
but while I followed the routine of education in the schools
of Geneva, I was, to a great degree, self-taught with regard
to my favourite studies. My father was not scientific, and
I was left to struggle with a child’s blindness, added to a
student’s thirst for knowledge. Under the guidance of my
new preceptors I entered with the greatest diligence into the
search of the philosopher’s stone and the elixir of life; but
the latter soon obtained my undivided attention. Wealth
was an inferior object, but what glory would attend the discovery
if I could banish disease from the human frame and
render man invulnerable to any but a violent death! Nor
were these my only visions. The raising of ghosts or devils
was a promise liberally accorded by my favourite authors,
the fulfillment of which I most eagerly sought; and if my
incantations were always unsuccessful, I attributed the failure
rather to my own inexperience and mistake than to a
want of skill or fidelity in my instructors. And thus for a
time I was occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an
unadept, a thousand contradictory theories and floundering
desperately in a very slough of multifarious knowledge,
guided by an ardent imagination and childish reason-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 37
ing, till an accident again changed the current of my ideas.
When I was about fifteen years old we had retired to our
house near Belrive, when we witnessed a most violent and
terrible thunderstorm. It advanced from behind the mountains
of Jura, and the thunder burst at once with frightful
loudness from various quarters of the heavens. I remained,
while the storm lasted, watching its progress with curiosity
and delight. As I stood at the door, on a sudden I beheld
a stream of fire issue from an old and beautiful oak which
stood about twenty yards from our house; and so soon as
the dazzling light vanished, the oak had disappeared, and
nothing remained but a blasted stump. When we visited it
the next morning, we found the tree shattered in a singular
manner. It was not splintered by the shock, but entirely reduced
to thin ribbons of wood. I never beheld anything so
utterly destroyed.
Before this I was not unacquainted with the more obvious
laws of electricity. On this occasion a man of great
research in natural philosophy was with us, and excited by
this catastrophe, he entered on the explanation of a theory
which he had formed on the subject of electricity and galvanism,
which was at once new and astonishing to me. All
that he said threw greatly into the shade Cornelius Agrippa,
Albertus Magnus, and Paracelsus, the lords of my imagination;
but by some fatality the overthrow of these men
disinclined me to pursue my accustomed studies. It seemed
to me as if nothing would or could ever be known. All that
had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew despicable.
By one of those caprices of the mind which we are perhaps 
38 Frankenstein
most subject to in early youth, I at once gave up my former
occupations, set down natural history and all its progeny
as a deformed and abortive creation, and entertained the
greatest disdain for a would-be science which could never
even step within the threshold of real knowledge. In this
mood of mind I betook myself to the mathematics and the
branches of study appertaining to that science as being
built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration.
Thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such
slight ligaments are we bound to prosperity or ruin. When I
look back, it seems to me as if this almost miraculous change
of inclination and will was the immediate suggestion of the
guardian angel of my life—the last effort made by the spirit
of preservation to avert the storm that was even then hanging
in the stars and ready to envelop me. Her victory was
announced by an unusual tranquillity and gladness of soul
which followed the relinquishing of my ancient and latterly
tormenting studies. It was thus that I was to be taught to
associate evil with their prosecution, happiness with their
disregard.
It was a strong effort of the spirit of good, but it was ineffectual.
Destiny was too potent, and her immutable laws
had decreed my utter and terrible destruction.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 39
Chapter 3
When I had attained the age of seventeen my parents
resolved that I should become a student at the university
of Ingolstadt. I had hitherto attended the schools of
Geneva, but my father thought it necessary for the completion
of my education that I should be made acquainted with
other customs than those of my native country. My departure
was therefore fixed at an early date, but before the day
resolved upon could arrive, the first misfortune of my life
occurred—an omen, as it were, of my future misery. Elizabeth
had caught the scarlet fever; her illness was severe, and
she was in the greatest danger. During her illness many arguments
had been urged to persuade my mother to refrain
from attending upon her. She had at first yielded to our entreaties,
but when she heard that the life of her favourite
was menaced, she could no longer control her anxiety. She
attended her sickbed; her watchful attentions triumphed
over the malignity of the distemper—Elizabeth was saved,
but the consequences of this imprudence were fatal to her
preserver. On the third day my mother sickened; her fever
was accompanied by the most alarming symptoms, and the
looks of her medical attendants prognosticated the worst
event. On her deathbed the fortitude and benignity of this
best of women did not desert her. She joined the hands of
Elizabeth and myself. ‘My children,’ she said, ‘my firmest 
40 Frankenstein
hopes of future happiness were placed on the prospect of
your union. This expectation will now be the consolation of
your father. Elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place
to my younger children. Alas! I regret that I am taken from
you; and, happy and beloved as I have been, is it not hard to
quit you all? But these are not thoughts befitting me; I will
endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to death and will indulge
a hope of meeting you in another world.’
She died calmly, and her countenance expressed affection
even in death. I need not describe the feelings of those
whose dearest ties are rent by that most irreparable evil, the
void that presents itself to the soul, and the despair that is
exhibited on the countenance. It is so long before the mind
can persuade itself that she whom we saw every day and
whose very existence appeared a part of our own can have
departed forever—that the brightness of a beloved eye can
have been extinguished and the sound of a voice so familiar
and dear to the ear can be hushed, never more to be heard.
These are the reflections of the first days; but when the lapse
of time proves the reality of the evil, then the actual bitterness
of grief commences. Yet from whom has not that rude
hand rent away some dear connection? And why should I describe
a sorrow which all have felt, and must feel? The time
at length arrives when grief is rather an indulgence than a
necessity; and the smile that plays upon the lips, although it
may be deemed a sacrilege, is not banished. My mother was
dead, but we had still duties which we ought to perform; we
must continue our course with the rest and learn to think
ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 41
has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been
deferred by these events, was now again determined upon.
I obtained from my father a respite of some weeks. It appeared
to me sacrilege so soon to leave the repose, akin to
death, of the house of mourning and to rush into the thick
of life. I was new to sorrow, but it did not the less alarm me.
I was unwilling to quit the sight of those that remained to
me, and above all, I desired to see my sweet Elizabeth in
some degree consoled.
She indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter
to us all. She looked steadily on life and assumed its
duties with courage and zeal. She devoted herself to those
whom she had been taught to call her uncle and cousins.
Never was she so enchanting as at this time, when she recalled
the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us.
She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make
us forget.
The day of my departure at length arrived. Clerval spent
the last evening with us. He had endeavoured to persuade
his father to permit him to accompany me and to become
my fellow student, but in vain. His father was a narrowminded
trader and saw idleness and ruin in the aspirations
and ambition of his son. Henry deeply felt the misfortune of
being debarred from a liberal education. He said little, but
when he spoke I read in his kindling eye and in his animated
glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be chained to
the miserable details of commerce.
We sat late. We could not tear ourselves away from each
other nor persuade ourselves to say the word ‘Farewell!’ It 
42 Frankenstein
was said, and we retired under the pretence of seeking repose,
each fancying that the other was deceived; but when
at morning’s dawn I descended to the carriage which was
to convey me away, they were all there—my father again to
bless me, Clerval to press my hand once more, my Elizabeth
to renew her entreaties that I would write often and
to bestow the last feminine attentions on her playmate and
friend.
I threw myself into the chaise that was to convey me away
and indulged in the most melancholy reflections. I, who had
ever been surrounded by amiable companions, continually
engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual pleasure—I
was now alone. In the university whither I was going I must
form my own friends and be my own protector. My life had
hitherto been remarkably secluded and domestic, and this
had given me invincible repugnance to new countenances.
I loved my brothers, Elizabeth, and Clerval; these were ‘old
familiar faces,’ but I believed myself totally unfitted for the
company of strangers. Such were my reflections as I commenced
my journey; but as I proceeded, my spirits and
hopes rose. I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge.
I had often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during
my youth cooped up in one place and had longed to enter
the world and take my station among other human beings.
Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed,
have been folly to repent.
I had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections
during my journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and
fatiguing. At length the high white steeple of the town met 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 43
my eyes. I alighted and was conducted to my solitary apartment
to spend the evening as I pleased.
The next morning I delivered my letters of introduction
and paid a visit to some of the principal professors.
Chance—or rather the evil influence, the Angel of Destruction,
which asserted omnipotent sway over me from
the moment I turned my reluctant steps from my father’s
door—led me first to M. Krempe, professor of natural philosophy.
He was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the
secrets of his science. He asked me several questions concerning
my progress in the different branches of science
appertaining to natural philosophy. I replied carelessly, and
partly in contempt, mentioned the names of my alchemists
as the principal authors I had studied. The professor stared.
‘Have you,’ he said, ‘really spent your time in studying such
nonsense?’
I replied in the affirmative. ‘Every minute,’ continued M.
Krempe with warmth, ‘every instant that you have wasted
on those books is utterly and entirely lost. You have burdened
your memory with exploded systems and useless
names. Good God! In what desert land have you lived,
where no one was kind enough to inform you that these
fancies which you have so greedily imbibed are a thousand
years old and as musty as they are ancient? I little expected,
in this enlightened and scientific age, to find a disciple of
Albertus Magnus and Paracelsus. My dear sir, you must begin
your studies entirely anew.’
So saying, he stepped aside and wrote down a list of several
books treating of natural philosophy which he desired 
44 Frankenstein
me to procure, and dismissed me after mentioning that in
the beginning of the following week he intended to commence
a course of lectures upon natural philosophy in its
general relations, and that M. Waldman, a fellow professor,
would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that
he omitted.
I returned home not disappointed, for I have said that I
had long considered those authors useless whom the professor
reprobated; but I returned not at all the more inclined to
recur to these studies in any shape. M. Krempe was a little
squat man with a gruff voice and a repulsive countenance;
the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in favour of
his pursuits. In rather a too philosophical and connected a
strain, perhaps, I have given an account of the conclusions I
had come to concerning them in my early years. As a child I
had not been content with the results promised by the modern
professors of natural science. With a confusion of ideas
only to be accounted for by my extreme youth and my want
of a guide on such matters, I had retrod the steps of knowledge
along the paths of time and exchanged the discoveries
of recent inquirers for the dreams of forgotten alchemists.
Besides, I had a contempt for the uses of modern natural
philosophy. It was very different when the masters of the
science sought immortality and power; such views, although
futile, were grand; but now the scene was changed.
The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the annihilation
of those visions on which my interest in science
was chiefly founded. I was required to exchange chimeras of
boundless grandeur for realities of little worth.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 45
Such were my reflections during the first two or three
days of my residence at Ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent
in becoming acquainted with the localities and the principal
residents in my new abode. But as the ensuing week
commenced, I thought of the information which M. Krempe
had given me concerning the lectures. And although I
could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow
deliver sentences out of a pulpit, I recollected what he
had said of M. Waldman, whom I had never seen, as he had
hitherto been out of town.
Partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, I went
into the lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly
after. This professor was very unlike his colleague. He
appeared about fifty years of age, but with an aspect expressive
of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hairs covered
his temples, but those at the back of his head were nearly
black. His person was short but remarkably erect and his
voice the sweetest I had ever heard. He began his lecture by
a recapitulation of the history of chemistry and the various
improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing
with fervour the names of the most distinguished
discoverers. He then took a cursory view of the present state
of the science and explained many of its elementary terms.
After having made a few preparatory experiments, he concluded
with a panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms
of which I shall never forget: ‘The ancient teachers of this
science,’ said he, ‘promised impossibilities and performed
nothing. The modern masters promise very little; they know
that metals cannot be transmuted and that the elixir of life 
46 Frankenstein
is a chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem
only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the
microscope or crucible, have indeed performed miracles.
They penetrate into the recesses of nature and show how
she works in her hiding-places. They ascend into the heavens;
they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the
nature of the air we breathe. They have acquired new and
almost unlimited powers; they can command the thunders
of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock the invisible
world with its own shadows.’
Such were the professor’s words—rather let me say such
the words of the fate—enounced to destroy me. As he went
on I felt as if my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy;
one by one the various keys were touched which formed the
mechanism of my being; chord after chord was sounded,
and soon my mind was filled with one thought, one conception,
one purpose. So much has been done, exclaimed
the soul of Frankenstein—more, far more, will I achieve;
treading in the steps already marked, I will pioneer a new
way, explore unknown powers, and unfold to the world the
deepest mysteries of creation.
I closed not my eyes that night. My internal being was in
a state of insurrection and turmoil; I felt that order would
thence arise, but I had no power to produce it. By degrees,
after the morning’s dawn, sleep came. I awoke, and my yesternight’s
thoughts were as a dream. There only remained
a resolution to return to my ancient studies and to devote
myself to a science for which I believed myself to possess a
natural talent. On the same day I paid M. Waldman a visit. 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 47
His manners in private were even more mild and attractive
than in public, for there was a certain dignity in his mien
during his lecture which in his own house was replaced by
the greatest affability and kindness. I gave him pretty nearly
the same account of my former pursuits as I had given to his
fellow professor. He heard with attention the little narration
concerning my studies and smiled at the names of Cornelius
Agrippa and Paracelsus, but without the contempt that
M. Krempe had exhibited. He said that ‘These were men
to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were indebted
for most of the foundations of their knowledge. They
had left to us, as an easier task, to give new names and arrange
in connected classifications the facts which they in
a great degree had been the instruments of bringing to
light. The labours of men of genius, however erroneously
directed, scarcely ever fail in ultimately turning to the solid
advantage of mankind.’ I listened to his statement, which
was delivered without any presumption or affectation, and
then added that his lecture had removed my prejudices
against modern chemists; I expressed myself in measured
terms, with the modesty and deference due from a youth
to his instructor, without letting escape (inexperience in
life would have made me ashamed) any of the enthusiasm
which stimulated my intended labours. I requested his advice
concerning the books I ought to procure.
‘I am happy,’ said M. Waldman, ‘to have gained a disciple;
and if your application equals your ability, I have no doubt
of your success. Chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy
in which the greatest improvements have been and 
48 Frankenstein
may be made; it is on that account that I have made it my
peculiar study; but at the same time, I have not neglected
the other branches of science. A man would make but a very
sorry chemist if he attended to that department of human
knowledge alone. If your wish is to become really a man
of science and not merely a petty experimentalist, I should
advise you to apply to every branch of natural philosophy,
including mathematics.’ He then took me into his laboratory
and explained to me the uses of his various machines,
instructing me as to what I ought to procure and promising
me the use of his own when I should have advanced far
enough in the science not to derange their mechanism. He
also gave me the list of books which I had requested, and I
took my leave.
Thus ended a day memorable to me; it decided my future
destiny.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 49
Chapter 4
From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry,
in the most comprehensive sense of the term,
became nearly my sole occupation. I read with ardour those
works, so full of genius and discrimination, which modern
inquirers have written on these subjects. I attended the lectures
and cultivated the acquaintance of the men of science
of the university, and I found even in M. Krempe a great
deal of sound sense and real information, combined, it is
true, with a repulsive physiognomy and manners, but not
on that account the less valuable. In M. Waldman I found a
true friend. His gentleness was never tinged by dogmatism,
and his instructions were given with an air of frankness
and good nature that banished every idea of pedantry. In a
thousand ways he smoothed for me the path of knowledge
and made the most abstruse inquiries clear and facile to my
apprehension. My application was at first fluctuating and
uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded and soon became
so ardent and eager that the stars often disappeared
in the light of morning whilst I was yet engaged in my laboratory.
As I applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that
my progress was rapid. My ardour was indeed the astonishment
of the students, and my proficiency that of the
masters. Professor Krempe often asked me, with a sly smile, 
50 Frankenstein
how Cornelius Agrippa went on, whilst M. Waldman expressed
the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. Two
years passed in this manner, during which I paid no visit to
Geneva, but was engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of
some discoveries which I hoped to make. None but those
who have experienced them can conceive of the enticements
of science. In other studies you go as far as others have gone
before you, and there is nothing more to know; but in a
scientific pursuit there is continual food for discovery and
wonder. A mind of moderate capacity which closely pursues
one study must infallibly arrive at great proficiency in
that study; and I, who continually sought the attainment of
one object of pursuit and was solely wrapped up in this, improved
so rapidly that at the end of two years I made some
discoveries in the improvement of some chemical instruments,
which procured me great esteem and admiration at
the university. When I had arrived at this point and had
become as well acquainted with the theory and practice of
natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of any of the
professors at Ingolstadt, my residence there being no longer
conducive to my improvements, I thought of returning to
my friends and my native town, when an incident happened
that protracted my stay.
One of the phenomena which had peculiarly attracted
my attention was the structure of the human frame, and,
indeed, any animal endued with life. Whence, I often asked
myself, did the principle of life proceed? It was a bold question,
and one which has ever been considered as a mystery;
yet with how many things are we upon the brink of becom-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 51
ing acquainted, if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain
our inquiries. I revolved these circumstances in my mind
and determined thenceforth to apply myself more particularly
to those branches of natural philosophy which relate
to physiology. Unless I had been animated by an almost supernatural
enthusiasm, my application to this study would
have been irksome and almost intolerable. To examine the
causes of life, we must first have recourse to death. I became
acquainted with the science of anatomy, but this was not sufficient;
I must also observe the natural decay and corruption
of the human body. In my education my father had taken
the greatest precautions that my mind should be impressed
with no supernatural horrors. I do not ever remember to
have trembled at a tale of superstition or to have feared the
apparition of a spirit. Darkness had no effect upon my fancy,
and a churchyard was to me merely the receptacle of bodies
deprived of life, which, from being the seat of beauty and
strength, had become food for the worm. Now I was led to
examine the cause and progress of this decay and forced to
spend days and nights in vaults and charnel-houses. My attention
was fixed upon every object the most insupportable
to the delicacy of the human feelings. I saw how the fine
form of man was degraded and wasted; I beheld the corruption
of death succeed to the blooming cheek of life; I saw
how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and brain.
I paused, examining and analysing all the minutiae of causation,
as exemplified in the change from life to death, and
death to life, until from the midst of this darkness a sudden
light broke in upon me—a light so brilliant and wondrous, 
52 Frankenstein
yet so simple, that while I became dizzy with the immensity
of the prospect which it illustrated, I was surprised that
among so many men of genius who had directed their inquiries
towards the same science, that I alone should be
reserved to discover so astonishing a secret.
Remember, I am not recording the vision of a madman.
The sun does not more certainly shine in the heavens than
that which I now affirm is true. Some miracle might have
produced it, yet the stages of the discovery were distinct and
probable. After days and nights of incredible labour and fatigue,
I succeeded in discovering the cause of generation
and life; nay, more, I became myself capable of bestowing
animation upon lifeless matter.
The astonishment which I had at first experienced on
this discovery soon gave place to delight and rapture. After
so much time spent in painful labour, to arrive at once
at the summit of my desires was the most gratifying consummation
of my toils. But this discovery was so great and
overwhelming that all the steps by which I had been progressively
led to it were obliterated, and I beheld only the
result. What had been the study and desire of the wisest
men since the creation of the world was now within my
grasp. Not that, like a magic scene, it all opened upon me at
once: the information I had obtained was of a nature rather
to direct my endeavours so soon as I should point them towards
the object of my search than to exhibit that object
already accomplished. I was like the Arabian who had been
buried with the dead and found a passage to life, aided only
by one glimmering and seemingly ineffectual light.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 53
I see by your eagerness and the wonder and hope which
your eyes express, my friend, that you expect to be informed
of the secret with which I am acquainted; that cannot be;
listen patiently until the end of my story, and you will easily
perceive why I am reserved upon that subject. I will not
lead you on, unguarded and ardent as I then was, to your
destruction and infallible misery. Learn from me, if not by
my precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous is the
acquirement of knowledge and how much happier that man
is who believes his native town to be the world, than he who
aspires to become greater than his nature will allow.
When I found so astonishing a power placed within my
hands, I hesitated a long time concerning the manner in
which I should employ it. Although I possessed the capacity
of bestowing animation, yet to prepare a frame for the
reception of it, with all its intricacies of fibres, muscles, and
veins, still remained a work of inconceivable difficulty and
labour. I doubted at first whether I should attempt the creation
of a being like myself, or one of simpler organization;
but my imagination was too much exalted by my first success
to permit me to doubt of my ability to give life to an
animal as complete and wonderful as man. The materials at
present within my command hardly appeared adequate to
so arduous an undertaking, but I doubted not that I should
ultimately succeed. I prepared myself for a multitude of
reverses; my operations might be incessantly baffled, and
at last my work be imperfect, yet when I considered the
improvement which every day takes place in science and
mechanics, I was encouraged to hope my present attempts 
54 Frankenstein
would at least lay the foundations of future success. Nor
could I consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan
as any argument of its impracticability. It was with these
feelings that I began the creation of a human being. As the
minuteness of the parts formed a great hindrance to my
speed, I resolved, contrary to my first intention, to make the
being of a gigantic stature, that is to say, about eight feet in
height, and proportionably large. After having formed this
determination and having spent some months in successfully
collecting and arranging my materials, I began.
No one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore
me onwards, like a hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success.
Life and death appeared to me ideal bounds, which I
should first break through, and pour a torrent of light into
our dark world. A new species would bless me as its creator
and source; many happy and excellent natures would owe
their being to me. No father could claim the gratitude of
his child so completely as I should deserve theirs. Pursuing
these reflections, I thought that if I could bestow animation
upon lifeless matter, I might in process of time (although I
now found it impossible) renew life where death had apparently
devoted the body to corruption.
These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued
my undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had
grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated
with confinement. Sometimes, on the very brink of
certainty, I failed; yet still I clung to the hope which the
next day or the next hour might realize. One secret which I
alone possessed was the hope to which I had dedicated my-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 55
self; and the moon gazed on my midnight labours, while,
with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature
to her hiding-places. Who shall conceive the horrors of my
secret toil as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the
grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless
clay? My limbs now tremble, and my eyes swim with the
remembrance; but then a resistless and almost frantic impulse
urged me forward; I seemed to have lost all soul or
sensation but for this one pursuit. It was indeed but a passing
trance, that only made me feel with renewed acuteness
so soon as, the unnatural stimulus ceasing to operate, I had
returned to my old habits. I collected bones from charnelhouses
and disturbed, with profane fingers, the tremendous
secrets of the human frame. In a solitary chamber, or rather
cell, at the top of the house, and separated from all the
other apartments by a gallery and staircase, I kept my workshop
of filthy creation; my eyeballs were starting from their
sockets in attending to the details of my employment. The
dissecting room and the slaughter-house furnished many
of my materials; and often did my human nature turn with
loathing from my occupation, whilst, still urged on by an
eagerness which perpetually increased, I brought my work
near to a conclusion.
The summer months passed while I was thus engaged,
heart and soul, in one pursuit. It was a most beautiful season;
never did the fields bestow a more plentiful harvest or
the vines yield a more luxuriant vintage, but my eyes were
insensible to the charms of nature. And the same feelings
which made me neglect the scenes around me caused me 
56 Frankenstein
also to forget those friends who were so many miles absent,
and whom I had not seen for so long a time. I knew my silence
disquieted them, and I well remembered the words
of my father: ‘I know that while you are pleased with yourself
you will think of us with affection, and we shall hear
regularly from you. You must pardon me if I regard any
interruption in your correspondence as a proof that your
other duties are equally neglected.’
I knew well therefore what would be my father’s feelings,
but I could not tear my thoughts from my employment,
loathsome in itself, but which had taken an irresistible hold
of my imagination. I wished, as it were, to procrastinate all
that related to my feelings of affection until the great object,
which swallowed up every habit of my nature, should be
completed.
I then thought that my father would be unjust if he ascribed
my neglect to vice or faultiness on my part, but I am
now convinced that he was justified in conceiving that I
should not be altogether free from blame. A human being
in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peaceful
mind and never to allow passion or a transitory desire
to disturb his tranquillity. I do not think that the pursuit
of knowledge is an exception to this rule. If the study to
which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections
and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures
in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly
unlawful, that is to say, not befitting the human mind.
If this rule were always observed; if no man allowed any
pursuit whatsoever to interfere with the tranquillity of his 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 57
domestic affections, Greece had not been enslaved, Caesar
would have spared his country, America would have been
discovered more gradually, and the empires of Mexico and
Peru had not been destroyed.
But I forget that I am moralizing in the most interesting
part of my tale, and your looks remind me to proceed. My
father made no reproach in his letters and only took notice
of my science by inquiring into my occupations more particularly
than before. Winter, spring, and summer passed
away during my labours; but I did not watch the blossom or
the expanding leaves—sights which before always yielded
me supreme delight—so deeply was I engrossed in my occupation.
The leaves of that year had withered before my
work drew near to a close, and now every day showed me
more plainly how well I had succeeded. But my enthusiasm
was checked by my anxiety, and I appeared rather like one
doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, or any other unwholesome
trade than an artist occupied by his favourite
employment. Every night I was oppressed by a slow fever,
and I became nervous to a most painful degree; the fall of
a leaf startled me, and I shunned my fellow creatures as if
I had been guilty of a crime. Sometimes I grew alarmed at
the wreck I perceived that I had become; the energy of my
purpose alone sustained me: my labours would soon end,
and I believed that exercise and amusement would then
drive away incipient disease; and I promised myself both of
these when my creation should be complete.
58 Frankenstein
Chapter 5
I
t was on a dreary night of November that I beheld the
accomplishment of my toils. With an anxiety that almost
amounted to agony, I collected the instruments of life
around me, that I might infuse a spark of being into the
lifeless thing that lay at my feet. It was already one in the
morning; the rain pattered dismally against the panes, and
my candle was nearly burnt out, when, by the glimmer of
the half-extinguished light, I saw the dull yellow eye of the
creature open; it breathed hard, and a convulsive motion
agitated its limbs.
How can I describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or
how delineate the wretch whom with such infinite pains
and care I had endeavoured to form? His limbs were in
proportion, and I had selected his features as beautiful.
Beautiful! Great God! His yellow skin scarcely covered the
work of muscles and arteries beneath; his hair was of a lustrous
black, and flowing; his teeth of a pearly whiteness; but
these luxuriances only formed a more horrid contrast with
his watery eyes, that seemed almost of the same colour as
the dun-white sockets in which they were set, his shrivelled
complexion and straight black lips.
The different accidents of life are not so changeable as the
feelings of human nature. I had worked hard for nearly two
years, for the sole purpose of infusing life into an inanimate 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 59
body. For this I had deprived myself of rest and health. I had
desired it with an ardour that far exceeded moderation; but
now that I had finished, the beauty of the dream vanished,
and breathless horror and disgust filled my heart. Unable
to endure the aspect of the being I had created, I rushed out
of the room and continued a long time traversing my bedchamber,
unable to compose my mind to sleep. At length
lassitude succeeded to the tumult I had before endured, and
I threw myself on the bed in my clothes, endeavouring to
seek a few moments of forgetfulness. But it was in vain; I
slept, indeed, but I was disturbed by the wildest dreams. I
thought I saw Elizabeth, in the bloom of health, walking
in the streets of Ingolstadt. Delighted and surprised, I embraced
her, but as I imprinted the first kiss on her lips, they
became livid with the hue of death; her features appeared
to change, and I thought that I held the corpse of my dead
mother in my arms; a shroud enveloped her form, and I
saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of the flannel. I
started from my sleep with horror; a cold dew covered my
forehead, my teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed;
when, by the dim and yellow light of the moon, as
it forced its way through the window shutters, I beheld the
wretch— the miserable monster whom I had created. He
held up the curtain of the bed; and his eyes, if eyes they may
be called, were fixed on me. His jaws opened, and he muttered
some inarticulate sounds, while a grin wrinkled his
cheeks. He might have spoken, but I did not hear; one hand
was stretched out, seemingly to detain me, but I escaped
and rushed downstairs. I took refuge in the courtyard be-
60 Frankenstein
longing to the house which I inhabited, where I remained
during the rest of the night, walking up and down in the
greatest agitation, listening attentively, catching and fearing
each sound as if it were to announce the approach of the
demoniacal corpse to which I had so miserably given life.
Oh! No mortal could support the horror of that countenance.
A mummy again endued with animation could
not be so hideous as that wretch. I had gazed on him while
unfinished; he was ugly then, but when those muscles and
joints were rendered capable of motion, it became a thing
such as even Dante could not have conceived.
I passed the night wretchedly. Sometimes my pulse beat
so quickly and hardly that I felt the palpitation of every artery;
at others, I nearly sank to the ground through languor
and extreme weakness. Mingled with this horror, I felt the
bitterness of disappointment; dreams that had been my
food and pleasant rest for so long a space were now become
a hell to me; and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so
complete!
Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered
to my sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt,
its white steeple and clock, which indicated the sixth hour.
The porter opened the gates of the court, which had that
night been my asylum, and I issued into the streets, pacing
them with quick steps, as if I sought to avoid the wretch
whom I feared every turning of the street would present to
my view. I did not dare return to the apartment which I inhabited,
but felt impelled to hurry on, although drenched by
the rain which poured from a black and comfortless sky.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 61
I continued walking in this manner for some time, endeavouring
by bodily exercise to ease the load that weighed
upon my mind. I traversed the streets without any clear
conception of where I was or what I was doing. My heart
palpitated in the sickness of fear, and I hurried on with irregular
steps, not daring to look about me:
Like one who, on a lonely road,
Doth walk in fear and dread,
And, having once turned round, walks on,
And turns no more his head;
Because he knows a frightful fiend
Doth close behind him tread.
[Coleridge’s ‘Ancient Mariner.’]
Continuing thus, I came at length opposite to the inn at
which the various diligences and carriages usually stopped.
Here I paused, I knew not why; but I remained some minutes
with my eyes fixed on a coach that was coming towards
me from the other end of the street. As it drew nearer I observed
that it was the Swiss diligence; it stopped just where
I was standing, and on the door being opened, I perceived
Henry Clerval, who, on seeing me, instantly sprung out.
‘My dear Frankenstein,’ exclaimed he, ‘how glad I am to see
you! How fortunate that you should be here at the very moment
of my alighting!’
Nothing could equal my delight on seeing Clerval; his
presence brought back to my thoughts my father, Elizabeth, 
62 Frankenstein
and all those scenes of home so dear to my recollection. I
grasped his hand, and in a moment forgot my horror and
misfortune; I felt suddenly, and for the first time during
many months, calm and serene joy. I welcomed my friend,
therefore, in the most cordial manner, and we walked towards
my college. Clerval continued talking for some time
about our mutual friends and his own good fortune in being
permitted to come to Ingolstadt. ‘You may easily believe,’
said he, ‘how great was the difficulty to persuade my father
that all necessary knowledge was not comprised in the noble
art of bookkeeping; and, indeed, I believe I left him incredulous
to the last, for his constant answer to my unwearied
entreaties was the same as that of the Dutch schoolmaster
in *The Vicar of Wakefield*: ‘I have ten thousand florins a
year without Greek, I eat heartily without Greek.’ But his
affection for me at length overcame his dislike of learning,
and he has permitted me to undertake a voyage of discovery
to the land of knowledge.’
‘It gives me the greatest delight to see you; but tell me
how you left my father, brothers, and Elizabeth.’
‘Very well, and very happy, only a little uneasy that they
hear from you so seldom. By the by, I mean to lecture you
a little upon their account myself. But, my dear Frankenstein,’
continued he, stopping short and gazing full in my
face, ‘I did not before remark how very ill you appear; so
thin and pale; you look as if you had been watching for several
nights.’
‘You have guessed right; I have lately been so deeply engaged
in one occupation that I have not allowed myself 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 63
sufficient rest, as you see; but I hope, I sincerely hope, that
all these employments are now at an end and that I am at
length free.’
I trembled excessively; I could not endure to think of,
and far less to allude to, the occurrences of the preceding
night. I walked with a quick pace, and we soon arrived at
my college. I then reflected, and the thought made me shiver,
that the creature whom I had left in my apartment might
still be there, alive and walking about. I dreaded to behold
this monster, but I feared still more that Henry should see
him. Entreating him, therefore, to remain a few minutes at
the bottom of the stairs, I darted up towards my own room.
My hand was already on the lock of the door before I recollected
myself. I then paused, and a cold shivering came over
me. I threw the door forcibly open, as children are accustomed
to do when they expect a spectre to stand in waiting
for them on the other side; but nothing appeared. I stepped
fearfully in: the apartment was empty, and my bedroom
was also freed from its hideous guest. I could hardly believe
that so great a good fortune could have befallen me,
but when I became assured that my enemy had indeed fled,
I clapped my hands for joy and ran down to Clerval.
We ascended into my room, and the servant presently
brought breakfast; but I was unable to contain myself. It
was not joy only that possessed me; I felt my flesh tingle
with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse beat rapidly. I
was unable to remain for a single instant in the same place;
I jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed
aloud. Clerval at first attributed my unusual spirits to joy 
64 Frankenstein
on his arrival, but when he observed me more attentively, he
saw a wildness in my eyes for which he could not account,
and my loud, unrestrained, heartless laughter frightened
and astonished him.
‘My dear Victor,’ cried he, ‘what, for God’s sake, is the
matter? Do not laugh in that manner. How ill you are! What
is the cause of all this?’
‘Do not ask me,’ cried I, putting my hands before my eyes,
for I thought I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room;
‘*he* can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!’ I imagined that the
monster seized me; I struggled furiously and fell down in
a fit.
Poor Clerval! What must have been his feelings? A meeting,
which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned
to bitterness. But I was not the witness of his grief, for I was
lifeless and did not recover my senses for a long, long time.
This was the commencement of a nervous fever which
confined me for several months. During all that time Henry
was my only nurse. I afterwards learned that, knowing
my father’s advanced age and unfitness for so long a journey,
and how wretched my sickness would make Elizabeth,
he spared them this grief by concealing the extent of my
disorder. He knew that I could not have a more kind and attentive
nurse than himself; and, firm in the hope he felt of
my recovery, he did not doubt that, instead of doing harm,
he performed the kindest action that he could towards
them.
But I was in reality very ill, and surely nothing but the
unbounded and unremitting attentions of my friend could 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 65
have restored me to life. The form of the monster on whom
I had bestowed existence was forever before my eyes, and
I raved incessantly concerning him. Doubtless my words
surprised Henry; he at first believed them to be the wanderings
of my disturbed imagination, but the pertinacity with
which I continually recurred to the same subject persuaded
him that my disorder indeed owed its origin to some uncommon
and terrible event.
By very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses that
alarmed and grieved my friend, I recovered. I remember
the first time I became capable of observing outward objects
with any kind of pleasure, I perceived that the fallen
leaves had disappeared and that the young buds were shooting
forth from the trees that shaded my window. It was a
divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to my
convalescence. I felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive
in my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a short
time I became as cheerful as before I was attacked by the
fatal passion.
‘Dearest Clerval,’ exclaimed I, ‘how kind, how very good
you are to me. This whole winter, instead of being spent in
study, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my
sick room. How shall I ever repay you? I feel the greatest
remorse for the disappointment of which I have been the
occasion, but you will forgive me.’
‘You will repay me entirely if you do not discompose
yourself, but get well as fast as you can; and since you appear
in such good spirits, I may speak to you on one subject,
may I not?’
66 Frankenstein
I trembled. One subject! What could it be? Could he allude
to an object on whom I dared not even think?
‘Compose yourself,’ said Clerval, who observed my
change of colour, ‘I will not mention it if it agitates you; but
your father and cousin would be very happy if they received
a letter from you in your own handwriting. They hardly
know how ill you have been and are uneasy at your long
silence.’
‘Is that all, my dear Henry? How could you suppose that
my first thought would not fly towards those dear, dear
friends whom I love and who are so deserving of my love?’
‘If this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps
be glad to see a letter that has been lying here some
days for you; it is from your cousin, I believe.’
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 67
Chapter 6
Clerval then put the following letter into my hands. It
was from my own Elizabeth:
My dearest Cousin,
You have been ill, very ill, and even the constant letters
of dear kind Henry are not sufficient to reassure me on your
account. You are forbidden to write—to hold a pen; yet one
word from you, dear Victor, is necessary to calm our apprehensions.
For a long time I have thought that each post
would bring this line, and my persuasions have restrained
my uncle from undertaking a journey to Ingolstadt. I have
prevented his encountering the inconveniences and perhaps
dangers of so long a journey, yet how often have I regretted
not being able to perform it myself! I figure to myself that
the task of attending on your sickbed has devolved on some
mercenary old nurse, who could never guess your wishes
nor minister to them with the care and affection of your
poor cousin. Yet that is over now: Clerval writes that indeed
you are getting better. I eagerly hope that you will confirm
this intelligence soon in your own handwriting.
Get well—and return to us. You will find a happy, cheerful
home and friends who love you dearly. Your father’s
health is vigorous, and he asks but to see you, but to be assured
that you are well; and not a care will ever cloud his
benevolent countenance. How pleased you would be to re-
68 Frankenstein
mark the improvement of our Ernest! He is now sixteen and
full of activity and spirit. He is desirous to be a true Swiss
and to enter into foreign service, but we cannot part with
him, at least until his elder brother return to us. My uncle
is not pleased with the idea of a military career in a distant
country, but Ernest never had your powers of application.
He looks upon study as an odious fetter; his time is spent
in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the lake. I
fear that he will become an idler unless we yield the point
and permit him to enter on the profession which he has selected.
Little alteration, except the growth of our dear children,
has taken place since you left us. The blue lake and snowclad
mountains—they never change; and I think our placid
home and our contented hearts are regulated by the same
immutable laws. My trifling occupations take up my time
and amuse me, and I am rewarded for any exertions by seeing
none but happy, kind faces around me. Since you left
us, but one change has taken place in our little household.
Do you remember on what occasion Justine Moritz entered
our family? Probably you do not; I will relate her history,
therefore, in a few words. Madame Moritz, her mother,
was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the
third. This girl had always been the favourite of her father,
but through a strange perversity, her mother could not endure
her, and after the death of M. Moritz, treated her very
ill. My aunt observed this, and when Justine was twelve
years of age, prevailed on her mother to allow her to live at
our house. The republican institutions of our country have 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 69
produced simpler and happier manners than those which
prevail in the great monarchies that surround it. Hence
there is less distinction between the several classes of its inhabitants;
and the lower orders, being neither so poor nor
so despised, their manners are more refined and moral. A
servant in Geneva does not mean the same thing as a servant
in France and England. Justine, thus received in our
family, learned the duties of a servant, a condition which,
in our fortunate country, does not include the idea of ignorance
and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human being.
Justine, you may remember, was a great favourite of
yours; and I recollect you once remarked that if you were in
an ill humour, one glance from Justine could dissipate it, for
the same reason that Ariosto gives concerning the beauty
of Angelica—she looked so frank-hearted and happy. My
aunt conceived a great attachment for her, by which she
was induced to give her an education superior to that which
she had at first intended. This benefit was fully repaid; Justine
was the most grateful little creature in the world: I do
not mean that she made any professions; I never heard one
pass her lips, but you could see by her eyes that she almost
adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay
and in many respects inconsiderate, yet she paid the greatest
attention to every gesture of my aunt. She thought her
the model of all excellence and endeavoured to imitate her
phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds
me of her.
When my dearest aunt died every one was too much occupied
in their own grief to notice poor Justine, who had 
70 Frankenstein
attended her during her illness with the most anxious affection.
Poor Justine was very ill; but other trials were reserved
for her.
One by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother,
with the exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless.
The conscience of the woman was troubled; she began
to think that the deaths of her favourites was a judgment
from heaven to chastise her partiality. She was a Roman
Catholic; and I believe her confessor confirmed the idea
which she had conceived. Accordingly, a few months after
your departure for Ingolstadt, Justine was called home by
her repentant mother. Poor girl! She wept when she quitted
our house; she was much altered since the death of my
aunt; grief had given softness and a winning mildness to
her manners which had before been remarkable for vivacity.
Nor was her residence at her mother’s house of a nature
to restore her gaiety. The poor woman was very vacillating
in her repentance. She sometimes begged Justine to forgive
her unkindness but much oftener accused her of having
caused the deaths of her brothers and sister. Perpetual fretting
at length threw Madame Moritz into a decline, which
at first increased her irritability, but she is now at peace for
ever. She died on the first approach of cold weather, at the
beginning of this last winter. Justine has returned to us, and
I assure you I love her tenderly. She is very clever and gentle
and extremely pretty; as I mentioned before, her mien and
her expressions continually remind me of my dear aunt.
I must say also a few words to you, my dear cousin, of
little darling William. I wish you could see him; he is very 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 71
tall of his age, with sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eyelashes,
and curling hair. When he smiles, two little dimples appear
on each cheek, which are rosy with health. He has already
had one or two little *wives*, but Louisa Biron is his favourite,
a pretty little girl of five years of age.
Now, dear Victor, I dare say you wish to be indulged in
a little gossip concerning the good people of Geneva. The
pretty Miss Mansfield has already received the congratulatory
visits on her approaching marriage with a young
Englishman, John Melbourne, Esq. Her ugly sister, Manon,
married M. Duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. Your
favourite schoolfellow, Louis Manoir, has suffered several
misfortunes since the departure of Clerval from Geneva.
But he has already recovered his spirits, and is reported to
be on the point of marrying a very lively, pretty Frenchwoman,
Madame Tavernier. She is a widow, and much older
than Manoir, but she is very much admired and a favourite
with everybody.
I have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin; but
my anxiety returns upon me as I conclude. Write, dearest
Victor—one line—one word will be a blessing to us. Ten
thousand thanks to Henry for his kindness, his affection,
and his many letters; we are sincerely grateful. Adieu! My
cousin, take care of yourself, and, I entreat you, write!
Elizabeth Lavenza
Geneva, March 18th, 17—
‘Dear, dear Elizabeth!’ I exclaimed when I had read her
letter. ‘I will write instantly and relieve them from the
anxiety they must feel.’ I wrote, and this exertion greatly 
72 Frankenstein
fatigued me; but my convalescence had commenced, and
proceeded regularly. In another fortnight I was able to leave
my chamber.
One of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce
Clerval to the several professors of the university. In doing
this, I underwent a kind of rough usage, ill befitting the
wounds that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal
night, the end of my labours, and the beginning of my misfortunes,
I had conceived a violent antipathy even to the
name of natural philosophy. When I was otherwise quite
restored to health, the sight of a chemical instrument would
renew all the agony of my nervous symptoms. Henry saw
this, and had removed all my apparatus from my view. He
had also changed my apartment, for he perceived that I had
acquired a dislike for the room which had previously been
my laboratory. But these cares of Clerval were made of no
avail when I visited the professors. M. Waldman inflicted
torture when he praised, with kindness and warmth, the
astonishing progress I had made in the sciences. He soon
perceived that I disliked the subject, but not guessing the
real cause, he attributed my feelings to modesty and changed
the subject from my improvement to the science itself, with
a desire, as I evidently saw, of drawing me out. What could I
do? He meant to please, and he tormented me. I felt as if he
had placed carefully, one by one, in my view those instruments
which were to be afterwards used in putting me to a
slow and cruel death. I writhed under his words yet dared
not exhibit the pain I felt. Clerval, whose eyes and feelings
were always quick in discerning the sensations of others, 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 73
declined the subject, alleging, in excuse, his total ignorance;
and the conversation took a more general turn. I thanked
my friend from my heart, but I did not speak. I saw plainly
that he was surprised, but he never attempted to draw my
secret from me; and although I loved him with a mixture
of affection and reverence that knew no bounds, yet I could
never persuade myself to confide to him that event which
was so often present to my recollection but which I feared
the detail to another would only impress more deeply.
M. Krempe was not equally docile; and in my condition
at that time, of almost insupportable sensitiveness, his
harsh, blunt encomiums gave me even more pain than the
benevolent approbation of M. Waldman. ‘D—n the fellow!’
cried he. ‘Why, M. Clerval, I assure you he has outstripped
us all. Ay, stare if you please; but it is nevertheless true. A
youngster who, but a few years ago, believed in Cornelius
Agrippa as firmly as in the Gospel, has now set himself at
the head of the university; and if he is not soon pulled down,
we shall all be out of countenance. Ay, ay,’ continued he, observing
my face expressive of suffering, ‘M. Frankenstein is
modest, an excellent quality in a young man. Young men
should be diffident of themselves, you know, M. Clerval; I
was myself when young; but that wears out in a very short
time.’
M. Krempe had now commenced a eulogy on himself,
which happily turned the conversation from a subject that
was so annoying to me.
Clerval had never sympathized in my tastes for natural
science, and his literary pursuits differed wholly from those 
74 Frankenstein
which had occupied me. He came to the university with the
design of making himself complete master of the Oriental
languages, as thus he should open a field for the plan
of life he had marked out for himself. Resolved to pursue
no inglorious career, he turned his eyes towards the East
as affording scope for his spirit of enterprise. The Persian,
Arabic, and Sanskrit languages engaged his attention, and
I was easily induced to enter on the same studies. Idleness
had ever been irksome to me, and now that I wished to fly
from reflection and hated my former studies, I felt great relief
in being the fellow pupil with my friend, and found not
only instruction but consolation in the works of the Orientalists.
I did not, like him, attempt a critical knowledge of
their dialects, for I did not contemplate making any other
use of them than temporary amusement. I read merely to
understand their meaning, and they well repaid my labours.
Their melancholy is soothing, and their joy elevating, to a
degree I never experienced in studying the authors of any
other country. When you read their writings, life appears to
consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses, in the smiles
and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire that consumes your
own heart. How different from the manly and heroical poetry
of Greece and Rome!
Summer passed away in these occupations, and my return
to Geneva was fixed for the latter end of autumn; but
being delayed by several accidents, winter and snow arrived,
the roads were deemed impassable, and my journey was retarded
until the ensuing spring. I felt this delay very bitterly,
for I longed to see my native town and my beloved friends. 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 75
My return had only been delayed so long from an unwillingness
to leave Clerval in a strange place before he had
become acquainted with any of its inhabitants. The winter,
however, was spent cheerfully, and although the spring was
uncommonly late, when it came its beauty compensated for
its dilatoriness.
The month of May had already commenced, and I expected
the letter daily which was to fix the date of my departure,
when Henry proposed a pedestrian tour in the environs of
Ingolstadt, that I might bid a personal farewell to the country
I had so long inhabited. I acceded with pleasure to this
proposition: I was fond of exercise, and Clerval had always
been my favourite companion in the rambles of this nature
that I had taken among the scenes of my native country.
We passed a fortnight in these perambulations; my
health and spirits had long been restored, and they gained
additional strength from the salubrious air I breathed, the
natural incidents of our progress, and the conversation of
my friend. Study had before secluded me from the intercourse
of my fellow creatures and rendered me unsocial, but
Clerval called forth the better feelings of my heart; he again
taught me to love the aspect of nature and the cheerful faces
of children. Excellent friend! How sincerely did you love
me and endeavour to elevate my mind until it was on a level
with your own! A selfish pursuit had cramped and narrowed
me until your gentleness and affection warmed and
opened my senses; I became the same happy creature who,
a few years ago, loved and beloved by all, had no sorrow or
care. When happy, inanimate nature had the power of be-
76 Frankenstein
stowing on me the most delightful sensations. A serene sky
and verdant fields filled me with ecstasy. The present season
was indeed divine; the flowers of spring bloomed in the
hedges, while those of summer were already in bud. I was
undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding year
had pressed upon me, notwithstanding my endeavours to
throw them off, with an invincible burden.
Henry rejoiced in my gaiety and sincerely sympathized
in my feelings; he exerted himself to amuse me, while he
expressed the sensations that filled his soul. The resources
of his mind on this occasion were truly astonishing; his
conversation was full of imagination, and very often, in imitation
of the Persian and Arabic writers, he invented tales
of wonderful fancy and passion. At other times he repeated
my favourite poems or drew me out into arguments, which
he supported with great ingenuity.
We returned to our college on a Sunday afternoon; the
peasants were dancing, and everyone we met appeared gay
and happy. My own spirits were high, and I bounded along
with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 77
Chapter 7
On my return, I found the following letter from my
father:—
‘My dear Victor,
‘You have probably waited impatiently for a letter to fix
the date of your return to us; and I was at first tempted to
write only a few lines, merely mentioning the day on which
I should expect you. But that would be a cruel kindness, and
I dare not do it. What would be your surprise, my son, when
you expected a happy and glad welcome, to behold, on the
contrary, tears and wretchedness? And how, Victor, can I
relate our misfortune? Absence cannot have rendered you
callous to our joys and griefs; and how shall I inflict pain
on my long absent son? I wish to prepare you for the woeful
news, but I know it is impossible; even now your eye skims
over the page to seek the words which are to convey to you
the horrible tidings.
William is dead!—that sweet child, whose smiles delighted
and warmed my heart, who was so gentle, yet so gay!
Victor, he is murdered! I will not attempt to console you; but
will simply relate the circumstances of the transaction.
Last Thursday (May 7th), I, my niece, and your two
brothers, went to walk in Plainpalais. The evening was
warm and serene, and we prolonged our walk farther than
usual. It was already dusk before we thought of returning; 
78 Frankenstein
and then we discovered that William and Ernest, who had
gone on before, were not to be found. We accordingly rested
on a seat until they should return. Presently Ernest came,
and enquired if we had seen his brother; he said, that he had
been playing with him, that William had run away to hide
himself, and that he vainly sought for him, and afterwards
waited for a long time, but that he did not return.
This account rather alarmed us, and we continued to
search for him until night fell, when Elizabeth conjectured
that he might have returned to the house. He was not there.
We returned again, with torches; for I could not rest, when
I thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed
to all the damps and dews of night; Elizabeth also
suffered extreme anguish. About five in the morning I discovered
my lovely boy, whom the night before I had seen
blooming and active in health, stretched on the grass livid
and motionless; the print of the murderer’s finger was on
his neck.
He was conveyed home, and the anguish that was visible
in my countenance betrayed the secret to Elizabeth. She
was very earnest to see the corpse. At first I attempted to
prevent her; but she persisted, and entering the room where
it lay, hastily examined the neck of the victim, and clasping
her hands exclaimed, ‘O God! I have murdered my darling
child!’
She fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty.
When she again lived, it was only to weep and sigh. She told
me, that that same evening William had teased her to let
him wear a very valuable miniature that she possessed of 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 79
your mother. This picture is gone, and was doubtless the
temptation which urged the murdered to the deed. We
have no trace of him at present, although our exertions to
discover him are unremitted; but they will not restore my
beloved William!
Come, dearest Victor; you alone can console Elizabeth.
She weeps continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the
cause of his death; her words pierce my heart. We are all
unhappy; but will not that be an additional motive for you,
my son, to return and be our comforter? Your dear mother!
Alas, Victor! I now say, Thank God she did not live to witness
the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling!
Come, Victor; not brooding thoughts of vengeance
against the assassin, but with feelings of peace and gentleness,
that will heal, instead of festering, the wounds of our
minds. Enter the house of mourning, my friend, but with
kindness and affection for those who love you, and not with
hatred for your enemies.
Your affectionate and afflicted father,
Alphonse Frankenstein.
Geneva, May 12th, 17—.
Clerval, who had watched my countenance as I read this
letter, was surprised to observe the despair that succeeded
the joy I at first expressed on receiving new from my friends.
I threw the letter on the table, and covered my face with my
hands.
‘My dear Frankenstein,’ exclaimed Henry, when he
perceived me weep with bitterness, ‘are you always to be
unhappy? My dear friend, what has happened?’
80 Frankenstein
I motioned him to take up the letter, while I walked up
and down the room in the extremest agitation. Tears also
gushed from the eyes of Clerval, as he read the account of
my misfortune.
‘I can offer you no consolation, my friend,’ said he; ‘your
disaster is irreparable. What do you intend to do?’
‘To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, Henry, to order
the horses.’
During our walk, Clerval endeavoured to say a few words
of consolation; he could only express his heartfelt sympathy.
‘Poor William!’ said he, dear lovely child, he now sleeps with
his angel mother! Who that had seen him bright and joyous
in his young beauty, but must weep over his untimely loss!
To die so miserably; to feel the murderer’s grasp! How much
more a murderer that could destroy radiant innocence!
Poor little fellow! one only consolation have we; his friends
mourn and weep, but he is at rest. The pang is over, his sufferings
are at an end for ever. A sod covers his gentle form,
and he knows no pain. He can no longer be a subject for
pity; we must reserve that for his miserable survivors.’
Clerval spoke thus as we hurried through the streets;
the words impressed themselves on my mind and I remembered
them afterwards in solitude. But now, as soon as the
horses arrived, I hurried into a cabriolet, and bade farewell
to my friend.
My journey was very melancholy. At first I wished to hurry
on, for I longed to console and sympathise with my loved
and sorrowing friends; but when I drew near my native
town, I slackened my progress. I could hardly sustain the 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 81
multitude of feelings that crowded into my mind. I passed
through scenes familiar to my youth, but which I had not
seen for nearly six years. How altered every thing might be
during that time! One sudden and desolating change had
taken place; but a thousand little circumstances might have
by degrees worked other alterations, which, although they
were done more tranquilly, might not be the less decisive.
Fear overcame me; I dared no advance, dreading a thousand
nameless evils that made me tremble, although I was
unable to define them.
I remained two days at Lausanne, in this painful state
of mind. I contemplated the lake: the waters were placid;
all around was calm; and the snowy mountains, ‘the palaces
of nature,’ were not changed. By degrees the calm and
heavenly scene restored me, and I continued my journey towards
Geneva.
The road ran by the side of the lake, which became narrower
as I approached my native town. I discovered more
distinctly the black sides of Jura, and the bright summit of
Mont Blanc. I wept like a child. ‘Dear mountains! my own
beautiful lake! how do you welcome your wanderer? Your
summits are clear; the sky and lake are blue and placid.
Is this to prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness?’
I fear, my friend, that I shall render myself tedious by
dwelling on these preliminary circumstances; but they were
days of comparative happiness, and I think of them with
pleasure. My country, my beloved country! who but a native
can tell the delight I took in again beholding thy streams, 
82 Frankenstein
thy mountains, and, more than all, thy lovely lake!
Yet, as I drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame
me. Night also closed around; and when I could hardly see
the dark mountains, I felt still more gloomily. The picture
appeared a vast and dim scene of evil, and I foresaw obscurely
that I was destined to become the most wretched of
human beings. Alas! I prophesied truly, and failed only in
one single circumstance, that in all the misery I imagined
and dreaded, I did not conceive the hundredth part of the
anguish I was destined to endure.
It was completely dark when I arrived in the environs
of Geneva; the gates of the town were already shut; and I
was obliged to pass the night at Secheron, a village at the
distance of half a league from the city. The sky was serene;
and, as I was unable to rest, I resolved to visit the spot where
my poor William had been murdered. As I could not pass
through the town, I was obliged to cross the lake in a boat
to arrive at Plainpalais. During this short voyage I saw the
lightning playing on the summit of Mont Blanc in the most
beautiful figures. The storm appeared to approach rapidly,
and, on landing, I ascended a low hill, that I might observe
its progress. It advanced; the heavens were clouded, and I
soon felt the rain coming slowly in large drops, but its violence
quickly increased.
I quitted my seat, and walked on, although the darkness
and storm increased every minute, and the thunder
burst with a terrific crash over my head. It was echoed from
Saleve, the Juras, and the Alps of Savoy; vivid flashes of
lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the lake, making 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 83
it appear like a vast sheet of fire; then for an instant every
thing seemed of a pitchy darkness, until the eye recovered
itself from the preceding flash. The storm, as is often the
case in Switzerland, appeared at once in various parts of the
heavens. The most violent storm hung exactly north of the
town, over the part of the lake which lies between the promontory
of Belrive and the village of Copet. Another storm
enlightened Jura with faint flashes; and another darkened
and sometimes disclosed the Mole, a peaked mountain to
the east of the lake.
While I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I
wandered on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky elevated
my spirits; I clasped my hands, and exclaimed aloud,
‘William, dear angel! this is thy funeral, this thy dirge!’ As
I said these words, I perceived in the gloom a figure which
stole from behind a clump of trees near me; I stood fixed,
gazing intently: I could not be mistaken. A flash of lightning
illuminated the object, and discovered its shape
plainly to me; its gigantic stature, and the deformity of its
aspect, more hideous than belongs to humanity, instantly
informed me that it was the wretch, the filthy daemon, to
whom I had given life. What did he there? Could he be (I
shuddered at the conception) the murderer of my brother?
No sooner did that idea cross my imagination, than I became
convinced of its truth; my teeth chattered, and I was
forced to lean against a tree for support. The figure passed
me quickly, and I lost it in the gloom. Nothing in human
shape could have destroyed the fair child. He was the murderer!
I could not doubt it. The mere presence of the idea 
84 Frankenstein
was an irresistible proof of the fact. I thought of pursuing
the devil; but it would have been in vain, for another flash
discovered him to me hanging among the rocks of the nearly
perpendicular ascent of Mont Saleve, a hill that bounds
Plainpalais on the south. He soon reached the summit, and
disappeared.
I remained motionless. The thunder ceased; but the rain
still continued, and the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable
darkness. I resolved in my minds the events which I
had until now sought to forget: the whole train of my progress
toward the creation; the appearance of the works of my
own hands at my bedside; its departure. Two years had now
nearly elapsed since the night on which he first received life;
and was this his first crime? Alas! I had turned loose into
the world a depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage
and misery; had he not murdered my brother?
No one can conceive the anguish I suffered during the
remainder of the night, which I spent, cold and wet, in the
open air. But I did not feel the inconvenience of the weather;
my imagination was busy in scenes of evil and despair.
I considered the being whom I had cast among mankind,
and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes of
horror, such as the deed which he had now done, nearly in
the light of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from
the grave, and forced to destroy all that was dear to me.
Day dawned; and I directed my steps towards the town.
The gates were open, and I hastened to my father’s house.
My first thought was to discover what I knew of the murderer,
and cause instant pursuit to be made. But I paused when 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 85
I reflected on the story that I had to tell. A being whom I
myself had formed, and endued with life, had met me at
midnight among the precipices of an inaccessible mountain.
I remembered also the nervous fever with which I had been
seized just at the time that I dated my creation, and which
would give an air of delirium to a tale otherwise so utterly
improbable. I well knew that if any other had communicated
such a relation to me, I should have looked upon it as the
ravings of insanity. Besides, the strange nature of the animal
would elude all pursuit, even if I were so far credited as
to persuade my relatives to commence it. And then of what
use would be pursuit? Who could arrest a creature capable
of scaling the overhanging sides of Mont Saleve? These reflections
determined me, and I resolved to remain silent.
It was about five in the morning when I entered my father’s
house. I told the servants not to disturb the family,
and went into the library to attend their usual hour of rising.
Six years had elapsed, passed in a dream but for one indelible
trace, and I stood in the same place where I had last
embraced my father before my departure for Ingolstadt. Beloved
and venerable parent! He still remained to me. I gazed
on the picture of my mother, which stood over the mantel-piece.
It was an historical subject, painted at my father’s
desire, and represented Caroline Beaufort in an agony of
despair, kneeling by the coffin of her dead father. Her garb
was rustic, and her cheek pale; but there was an air of dignity
and beauty, that hardly permitted the sentiment of
pity. Below this picture was a miniature of William; and 
86 Frankenstein
my tears flowed when I looked upon it. While I was thus
engaged, Ernest entered: he had heard me arrive, and hastened
to welcome me: ‘Welcome, my dearest Victor,’ said he.
‘Ah! I wish you had come three months ago, and then you
would have found us all joyous and delighted. You come
to us now to share a misery which nothing can alleviate;
yet your presence will, I hope, revive our father, who seems
sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions will
induce poor Elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting
self-accusations.—Poor William! he was our darling and
our pride!’
Tears, unrestrained, fell from my brother’s eyes; a sense
of mortal agony crept over my frame. Before, I had only
imagined the wretchedness of my desolated home; the reality
came on me as a new, and a not less terrible, disaster. I
tried to calm Ernest; I enquired more minutely concerning
my father, and her I named my cousin.
‘She most of all,’ said Ernest, ‘requires consolation; she
accused herself of having caused the death of my brother,
and that made her very wretched. But since the murderer
has been discovered—‘
‘The murderer discovered! Good God! how can that be?
who could attempt to pursue him? It is impossible; one
might as well try to overtake the winds, or confine a mountain-stream
with a straw. I saw him too; he was free last
night!’
‘I do not know what you mean,’ replied my brother, in
accents of wonder, ‘but to us the discovery we have made
completes our misery. No one would believe it at first; and 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 87
even now Elizabeth will not be convinced, notwithstanding
all the evidence. Indeed, who would credit that Justine
Moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the family,
could suddenly become so capable of so frightful, so appalling
a crime?’
‘Justine Moritz! Poor, poor girl, is she the accused? But
it is wrongfully; every one knows that; no one believes it,
surely, Ernest?’
‘No one did at first; but several circumstances came out,
that have almost forced conviction upon us; and her own
behaviour has been so confused, as to add to the evidence of
facts a weight that, I fear, leaves no hope for doubt. But she
will be tried to-day, and you will then hear all.’
He then related that, the morning on which the murder
of poor William had been discovered, Justine had been
taken ill, and confined to her bed for several days. During
this interval, one of the servants, happening to examine the
apparel she had worn on the night of the murder, had discovered
in her pocket the picture of my mother, which had
been judged to be the temptation of the murderer. The servant
instantly showed it to one of the others, who, without
saying a word to any of the family, went to a magistrate; and,
upon their deposition, Justine was apprehended. On being
charged with the fact, the poor girl confirmed the suspicion
in a great measure by her extreme confusion of manner.
This was a strange tale, but it did not shake my faith; and
I replied earnestly, ‘You are all mistaken; I know the murderer.
Justine, poor, good Justine, is innocent.’
At that instant my father entered. I saw unhappiness 
88 Frankenstein
deeply impressed on his countenance, but he endeavoured
to welcome me cheerfully; and, after we had exchanged
our mournful greeting, would have introduced some other
topic than that of our disaster, had not Ernest exclaimed,
‘Good God, papa! Victor says that he knows who was the
murderer of poor William.’
‘We do also, unfortunately,’ replied my father, ‘for indeed
I had rather have been for ever ignorant than have discovered
so much depravity and ungratitude in one I valued so
highly.’
‘My dear father, you are mistaken; Justine is innocent.’
‘If she is, God forbid that she should suffer as guilty. She
is to be tried to-day, and I hope, I sincerely hope, that she
will be acquitted.’
This speech calmed me. I was firmly convinced in my
own mind that Justine, and indeed every human being, was
guiltless of this murder. I had no fear, therefore, that any
circumstantial evidence could be brought forward strong
enough to convict her. My tale was not one to announce
publicly; its astounding horror would be looked upon as
madness by the vulgar. Did any one indeed exist, except I,
the creator, who would believe, unless his senses convinced
him, in the existence of the living monument of presumption
and rash ignorance which I had let loose upon the
world?
We were soon joined by Elizabeth. Time had altered her
since I last beheld her; it had endowed her with loveliness
surpassing the beauty of her childish years. There was the
same candour, the same vivacity, but it was allied to an ex-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 89
pression more full of sensibility and intellect. She welcomed
me with the greatest affection. ‘Your arrival, my dear cousin,’
said she, ‘fills me with hope. You perhaps will find some
means to justify my poor guiltless Justine. Alas! who is safe,
if she be convicted of crime? I rely on her innocence as certainly
as I do upon my own. Our misfortune is doubly hard
to us; we have not only lost that lovely darling boy, but this
poor girl, whom I sincerely love, is to be torn away by even a
worse fate. If she is condemned, I never shall know joy more.
But she will not, I am sure she will not; and then I shall be
happy again, even after the sad death of my little William.’
‘She is innocent, my Elizabeth,’ said I, ‘and that shall be
proved; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the
assurance of her acquittal.’
‘How kind and generous you are! every one else believes
in her guilt, and that made me wretched, for I knew that
it was impossible: and to see every one else prejudiced in
so deadly a manner rendered me hopeless and despairing.’
She wept.
‘Dearest niece,’ said my father, ‘dry your tears. If she is,
as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws, and
the activity with which I shall prevent the slightest shadow
of partiality.’
90 Frankenstein
Chapter 8
We passed a few sad hours until eleven o’clock, when
the trial was to commence. My father and the rest of
the family being obliged to attend as witnesses, I accompanied
them to the court. During the whole of this wretched
mockery of justice I suffered living torture. It was to be decided
whether the result of my curiosity and lawless devices
would cause the death of two of my fellow beings: one a
smiling babe full of innocence and joy, the other far more
dreadfully murdered, with every aggravation of infamy
that could make the murder memorable in horror. Justine
also was a girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised
to render her life happy; now all was to be obliterated
in an ignominious grave, and I the cause! A thousand times
rather would I have confessed myself guilty of the crime ascribed
to Justine, but I was absent when it was committed,
and such a declaration would have been considered as the
ravings of a madman and would not have exculpated her
who suffered through me.
The appearance of Justine was calm. She was dressed
in mourning, and her countenance, always engaging, was
rendered, by the solemnity of her feelings, exquisitely beautiful.
Yet she appeared confident in innocence and did not
tremble, although gazed on and execrated by thousands, for
all the kindness which her beauty might otherwise have 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 91
excited was obliterated in the minds of the spectators by
the imagination of the enormity she was supposed to have
committed. She was tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently
constrained; and as her confusion had before been
adduced as a proof of her guilt, she worked up her mind to
an appearance of courage. When she entered the court she
threw her eyes round it and quickly discovered where we
were seated. A tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw us,
but she quickly recovered herself, and a look of sorrowful
affection seemed to attest her utter guiltlessness.
The trial began, and after the advocate against her had
stated the charge, several witnesses were called. Several
strange facts combined against her, which might have staggered
anyone who had not such proof of her innocence as
I had. She had been out the whole of the night on which
the murder had been committed and towards morning had
been perceived by a market-woman not far from the spot
where the body of the murdered child had been afterwards
found. The woman asked her what she did there, but she
looked very strangely and only returned a confused and
unintelligible answer. She returned to the house about eight
o’clock, and when one inquired where she had passed the
night, she replied that she had been looking for the child
and demanded earnestly if anything had been heard concerning
him. When shown the body, she fell into violent
hysterics and kept her bed for several days. The picture was
then produced which the servant had found in her pocket;
and when Elizabeth, in a faltering voice, proved that it was
the same which, an hour before the child had been missed, 
92 Frankenstein
she had placed round his neck, a murmur of horror and indignation
filled the court.
Justine was called on for her defence. As the trial had
proceeded, her countenance had altered. Surprise, horror,
and misery were strongly expressed. Sometimes she struggled
with her tears, but when she was desired to plead, she
collected her powers and spoke in an audible although variable
voice.
‘God knows,’ she said, ‘how entirely I am innocent. But
I do not pretend that my protestations should acquit me; I
rest my innocence on a plain and simple explanation of the
facts which have been adduced against me, and I hope the
character I have always borne will incline my judges to a
favourable interpretation where any circumstance appears
doubtful or suspicious.’
She then related that, by the permission of Elizabeth, she
had passed the evening of the night on which the murder
had been committed at the house of an aunt at Chene, a
village situated at about a league from Geneva. On her return,
at about nine o’clock, she met a man who asked her if
she had seen anything of the child who was lost. She was
alarmed by this account and passed several hours in looking
for him, when the gates of Geneva were shut, and she
was forced to remain several hours of the night in a barn
belonging to a cottage, being unwilling to call up the inhabitants,
to whom she was well known. Most of the night she
spent here watching; towards morning she believed that she
slept for a few minutes; some steps disturbed her, and she
awoke. It was dawn, and she quitted her asylum, that she 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 93
might again endeavour to find my brother. If she had gone
near the spot where his body lay, it was without her knowledge.
That she had been bewildered when questioned by the
market-woman was not surprising, since she had passed a
sleepless night and the fate of poor William was yet uncertain.
Concerning the picture she could give no account.
‘I know,’ continued the unhappy victim, ‘how heavily
and fatally this one circumstance weighs against me, but I
have no power of explaining it; and when I have expressed
my utter ignorance, I am only left to conjecture concerning
the probabilities by which it might have been placed in
my pocket. But here also I am checked. I believe that I have
no enemy on earth, and none surely would have been so
wicked as to destroy me wantonly. Did the murderer place
it there? I know of no opportunity afforded him for so doing;
or, if I had, why should he have stolen the jewel, to part
with it again so soon?
‘I commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet I
see no room for hope. I beg permission to have a few witnesses
examined concerning my character, and if their
testimony shall not overweigh my supposed guilt, I must
be condemned, although I would pledge my salvation on
my innocence.’
Several witnesses were called who had known her for
many years, and they spoke well of her; but fear and hatred
of the crime of which they supposed her guilty rendered
them timorous and unwilling to come forward. Elizabeth
saw even this last resource, her excellent dispositions and
irreproachable conduct, about to fail the accused, when, 
94 Frankenstein
although violently agitated, she desired permission to address
the court.
‘I am,’ said she, ‘the cousin of the unhappy child who was
murdered, or rather his sister, for I was educated by and
have lived with his parents ever since and even long before
his birth. It may therefore be judged indecent in me to come
forward on this occasion, but when I see a fellow creature
about to perish through the cowardice of her pretended
friends, I wish to be allowed to speak, that I may say what
I know of her character. I am well acquainted with the accused.
I have lived in the same house with her, at one time
for five and at another for nearly two years. During all that
period she appeared to me the most amiable and benevolent
of human creatures. She nursed Madame Frankenstein, my
aunt, in her last illness, with the greatest affection and care
and afterwards attended her own mother during a tedious
illness, in a manner that excited the admiration of all who
knew her, after which she again lived in my uncle’s house,
where she was beloved by all the family. She was warmly
attached to the child who is now dead and acted towards
him like a most affectionate mother. For my own part, I do
not hesitate to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence
produced against her, I believe and rely on her perfect innocence.
She had no temptation for such an action; as to the
bauble on which the chief proof rests, if she had earnestly
desired it, I should have willingly given it to her, so much
do I esteem and value her.’
A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth’s simple
and powerful appeal, but it was excited by her generous 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 95
interference, and not in favour of poor Justine, on whom
the public indignation was turned with renewed violence,
charging her with the blackest ingratitude. She herself wept
as Elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer. My own agitation
and anguish was extreme during the whole trial. I
believed in her innocence; I knew it. Could the demon who
had (I did not for a minute doubt) murdered my brother
also in his hellish sport have betrayed the innocent to death
and ignominy? I could not sustain the horror of my situation,
and when I perceived that the popular voice and the
countenances of the judges had already condemned my
unhappy victim, I rushed out of the court in agony. The tortures
of the accused did not equal mine; she was sustained
by innocence, but the fangs of remorse tore my bosom and
would not forgo their hold.
I passed a night of unmingled wretchedness. In the morning
I went to the court; my lips and throat were parched. I
dared not ask the fatal question, but I was known, and the
officer guessed the cause of my visit. The ballots had been
thrown; they were all black, and Justine was condemned.
I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt. I had before
experienced sensations of horror, and I have endeavoured
to bestow upon them adequate expressions, but words cannot
convey an idea of the heart-sickening despair that I then
endured. The person to whom I addressed myself added
that Justine had already confessed her guilt. ‘That evidence,’
he observed, ‘was hardly required in so glaring a case, but
I am glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to condemn
a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever 
96 Frankenstein
so decisive.’
This was strange and unexpected intelligence; what
could it mean? Had my eyes deceived me? And was I really
as mad as the whole world would believe me to be if I
disclosed the object of my suspicions? I hastened to return
home, and Elizabeth eagerly demanded the result.
‘My cousin,’ replied I, ‘it is decided as you may have expected;
all judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer
than that one guilty should escape. But she has confessed.’
This was a dire blow to poor Elizabeth, who had relied
with firmness upon Justine’s innocence. ‘Alas!’ said she.
‘How shall I ever again believe in human goodness? Justine,
whom I loved and esteemed as my sister, how could she put
on those smiles of innocence only to betray? Her mild eyes
seemed incapable of any severity or guile, and yet she has
committed a murder.’
Soon after we heard that the poor victim had expressed a
desire to see my cousin. My father wished her not to go but
said that he left it to her own judgment and feelings to decide.
‘Yes,’ said Elizabeth, ‘I will go, although she is guilty;
and you, Victor, shall accompany me; I cannot go alone.’
The idea of this visit was torture to me, yet I could not refuse.
We entered the gloomy prison chamber and beheld Justine
sitting on some straw at the farther end; her hands were
manacled, and her head rested on her knees. She rose on
seeing us enter; and when we were left alone with her, she
threw herself at the feet of Elizabeth, weeping bitterly. My
cousin wept also.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 97
‘Oh, Justine!’ said she. ‘Why did you rob me of my last
consolation? I relied on your innocence, and although I was
then very wretched, I was not so miserable as I am now.’
‘And do you also believe that I am so very, very wicked?
Do you also join with my enemies to crush me, to condemn
me as a murderer?’ Her voice was suffocated with sobs.
‘Rise, my poor girl,’ said Elizabeth; ‘why do you kneel, if
you are innocent? I am not one of your enemies, I believed
you guiltless, notwithstanding every evidence, until I heard
that you had yourself declared your guilt. That report, you
say, is false; and be assured, dear Justine, that nothing can
shake my confidence in you for a moment, but your own
confession.’
‘I did confess, but I confessed a lie. I confessed, that I
might obtain absolution; but now that falsehood lies heavier
at my heart than all my other sins. The God of heaven
forgive me! Ever since I was condemned, my confessor has
besieged me; he threatened and menaced, until I almost began
to think that I was the monster that he said I was. He
threatened excommunication and hell fire in my last moments
if I continued obdurate. Dear lady, I had none to
support me; all looked on me as a wretch doomed to ignominy
and perdition. What could I do? In an evil hour I
subscribed to a lie; and now only am I truly miserable.’
She paused, weeping, and then continued, ‘I thought
with horror, my sweet lady, that you should believe your
Justine, whom your blessed aunt had so highly honoured,
and whom you loved, was a creature capable of a crime
which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated. 
98 Frankenstein
Dear William! dearest blessed child! I soon shall see you
again in heaven, where we shall all he happy; and that consoles
me, going as I am to suffer ignominy and death.’
‘Oh, Justine! Forgive me for having for one moment distrusted
you. Why did you confess? But do not mourn, dear
girl. Do not fear. I will proclaim, I will prove your innocence.
I will melt the stony hearts of your enemies by my
tears and prayers. You shall not die! You, my playfellow, my
companion, my sister, perish on the scaffold! No! No! I never
could survive so horrible a misfortune.’
Justine shook her head mournfully. ‘I do not fear to die,’
she said; ‘that pang is past. God raises my weakness and
gives me courage to endure the worst. I leave a sad and bitter
world; and if you remember me and think of me as of
one unjustly condemned, I am resigned to the fate awaiting
me. Learn from me, dear lady, to submit in patience to the
will of heaven!’
During this conversation I had retired to a corner of the
prison room, where I could conceal the horrid anguish that
possessed me. Despair! Who dared talk of that? The poor
victim, who on the morrow was to pass the awful boundary
between life and death, felt not, as I did, such deep and
bitter agony. I gnashed my teeth and ground them together,
uttering a groan that came from my inmost soul. Justine
started. When she saw who it was, she approached me and
said, ‘Dear sir, you are very kind to visit me; you, I hope, do
not believe that I am guilty?’
I could not answer. ‘No, Justine,’ said Elizabeth; ‘he is
more convinced of your innocence than I was, for even 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 99
when he heard that you had confessed, he did not credit it.’
‘I truly thank him. In these last moments I feel the sincerest
gratitude towards those who think of me with kindness.
How sweet is the affection of others to such a wretch as I
am! It removes more than half my misfortune, and I feel as
if I could die in peace now that my innocence is acknowledged
by you, dear lady, and your cousin.’
Thus the poor sufferer tried to comfort others and herself.
She indeed gained the resignation she desired. But I,
the true murderer, felt the never-dying worm alive in my
bosom, which allowed of no hope or consolation. Elizabeth
also wept and was unhappy, but hers also was the misery
of innocence, which, like a cloud that passes over the
fair moon, for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness.
Anguish and despair had penetrated into the core of
my heart; I bore a hell within me which nothing could extinguish.
We stayed several hours with Justine, and it was
with great difficulty that Elizabeth could tear herself away.
‘I wish,’ cried she, ‘that I were to die with you; I cannot live
in this world of misery.’
Justine assumed an air of cheerfulness, while she with
difficulty repressed her bitter tears. She embraced Elizabeth
and said in a voice of half-suppressed emotion, ‘Farewell,
sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend;
may heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you; may this
be the last misfortune that you will ever suffer! Live, and be
happy, and make others so.’
And on the morrow Justine died. Elizabeth’s heart-rending
eloquence failed to move the judges from their settled 
100 Frankenstein
conviction in the criminality of the saintly sufferer. My passionate
and indignant appeals were lost upon them. And
when I received their cold answers and heard the harsh, unfeeling
reasoning of these men, my purposed avowal died
away on my lips. Thus I might proclaim myself a madman,
but not revoke the sentence passed upon my wretched victim.
She perished on the scaffold as a murderess!
From the tortures of my own heart, I turned to contemplate
the deep and voiceless grief of my Elizabeth. This also
was my doing! And my father’s woe, and the desolation of
that late so smiling home all was the work of my thrice-accursed
hands! Ye weep, unhappy ones, but these are not
your last tears! Again shall you raise the funeral wail, and
the sound of your lamentations shall again and again be
heard! Frankenstein, your son, your kinsman, your early,
much-loved friend; he who would spend each vital drop
of blood for your sakes, who has no thought nor sense of
joy except as it is mirrored also in your dear countenances,
who would fill the air with blessings and spend his life
in serving you— he bids you weep, to shed countless tears;
happy beyond his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied,
and if the destruction pause before the peace of the grave
have succeeded to your sad torments!
Thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror,
and despair, I beheld those I loved spend vain sorrow
upon the graves of William and Justine, the first hapless
victims to my unhallowed arts.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 101
Chapter 9
Nothing is more painful to the human mind than, after
the feelings have been worked up by a quick succession
of events, the dead calmness of inaction and certainty which
follows and deprives the soul both of hope and fear. Justine
died, she rested, and I was alive. The blood flowed freely
in my veins, but a weight of despair and remorse pressed
on my heart which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from
my eyes; I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had committed
deeds of mischief beyond description horrible, and more,
much more (I persuaded myself) was yet behind. Yet my
heart overflowed with kindness and the love of virtue. I had
begun life with benevolent intentions and thirsted for the
moment when I should put them in practice and make myself
useful to my fellow beings. Now all was blasted; instead
of that serenity of conscience which allowed me to look
back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and from thence
to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse
and the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of
intense tortures such as no language can describe.
This state of mind preyed upon my health, which had
perhaps never entirely recovered from the first shock it had
sustained. I shunned the face of man; all sound of joy or
complacency was torture to me; solitude was my only consolation—deep,
dark, deathlike solitude.
102 Frankenstein
My father observed with pain the alteration perceptible
in my disposition and habits and endeavoured by arguments
deduced from the feelings of his serene conscience
and guiltless life to inspire me with fortitude and awaken in
me the courage to dispel the dark cloud which brooded over
me. ‘Do you think, Victor,’ said he, ‘that I do not suffer also?
No one could love a child more than I loved your brother’—
tears came into his eyes as he spoke— ‘but is it not a duty to
the survivors that we should refrain from augmenting their
unhappiness by an appearance of immoderate grief? It is
also a duty owed to yourself, for excessive sorrow prevents
improvement or enjoyment, or even the discharge of daily
usefulness, without which no man is fit for society.’
This advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to
my case; I should have been the first to hide my grief and
console my friends if remorse had not mingled its bitterness,
and terror its alarm, with my other sensations. Now I
could only answer my father with a look of despair and endeavour
to hide myself from his view.
About this time we retired to our house at Belrive. This
change was particularly agreeable to me. The shutting of
the gates regularly at ten o’clock and the impossibility of
remaining on the lake after that hour had rendered our residence
within the walls of Geneva very irksome to me. I was
now free. Often, after the rest of the family had retired for
the night, I took the boat and passed many hours upon the
water. Sometimes, with my sails set, I was carried by the
wind; and sometimes, after rowing into the middle of the
lake, I left the boat to pursue its own course and gave way to 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 103
my own miserable reflections. I was often tempted, when all
was at peace around me, and I the only unquiet thing that
wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and heavenly—if I
except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and interrupted
croaking was heard only when I approached the shore—often,
I say, I was tempted to plunge into the silent lake, that
the waters might close over me and my calamities forever.
But I was restrained, when I thought of the heroic and
suffering Elizabeth, whom I tenderly loved, and whose existence
was bound up in mine. I thought also of my father
and surviving brother; should I by my base desertion leave
them exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend
whom I had let loose among them?
At these moments I wept bitterly and wished that peace
would revisit my mind only that I might afford them consolation
and happiness. But that could not be. Remorse
extinguished every hope. I had been the author of unalterable
evils, and I lived in daily fear lest the monster whom I
had created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had
an obscure feeling that all was not over and that he would
still commit some signal crime, which by its enormity
should almost efface the recollection of the past. There was
always scope for fear so long as anything I loved remained
behind. My abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived.
When I thought of him I gnashed my teeth, my eyes became
inflamed, and I ardently wished to extinguish that
life which I had so thoughtlessly bestowed. When I reflected
on his crimes and malice, my hatred and revenge burst
all bounds of moderation. I would have made a pilgrimage 
104 Frankenstein
to the highest peak of the Andes, could I when there have
precipitated him to their base. I wished to see him again,
that I might wreak the utmost extent of abhorrence on his
head and avenge the deaths of William and Justine. Our
house was the house of mourning. My father’s health was
deeply shaken by the horror of the recent events. Elizabeth
was sad and desponding; she no longer took delight in her
ordinary occupations; all pleasure seemed to her sacrilege
toward the dead; eternal woe and tears she then thought
was the just tribute she should pay to innocence so blasted
and destroyed. She was no longer that happy creature who
in earlier youth wandered with me on the banks of the lake
and talked with ecstasy of our future prospects. The first of
those sorrows which are sent to wean us from the earth had
visited her, and its dimming influence quenched her dearest
smiles.
‘When I reflect, my dear cousin,’ said she, ‘on the miserable
death of Justine Moritz, I no longer see the world and
its works as they before appeared to me. Before, I looked
upon the accounts of vice and injustice that I read in books
or heard from others as tales of ancient days or imaginary
evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to reason
than to the imagination; but now misery has come home,
and men appear to me as monsters thirsting for each other’s
blood. Yet I am certainly unjust. Everybody believed
that poor girl to be guilty; and if she could have committed
the crime for which she suffered, assuredly she would have
been the most depraved of human creatures. For the sake
of a few jewels, to have murdered the son of her benefac-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 105
tor and friend, a child whom she had nursed from its birth,
and appeared to love as if it had been her own! I could not
consent to the death of any human being, but certainly I
should have thought such a creature unfit to remain in the
society of men. But she was innocent. I know, I feel she was
innocent; you are of the same opinion, and that confirms
me. Alas! Victor, when falsehood can look so like the truth,
who can assure themselves of certain happiness? I feel as if
I were walking on the edge of a precipice, towards which
thousands are crowding and endeavouring to plunge me
into the abyss. William and Justine were assassinated, and
the murderer escapes; he walks about the world free, and
perhaps respected. But even if I were condemned to suffer
on the scaffold for the same crimes, I would not change
places with such a wretch.’
I listened to this discourse with the extremest agony. I,
not in deed, but in effect, was the true murderer. Elizabeth
read my anguish in my countenance, and kindly taking
my hand, said, ‘My dearest friend, you must calm yourself.
These events have affected me, God knows how deeply; but
I am not so wretched as you are. There is an expression of
despair, and sometimes of revenge, in your countenance
that makes me tremble. Dear Victor, banish these dark passions.
Remember the friends around you, who centre all
their hopes in you. Have we lost the power of rendering you
happy? Ah! While we love, while we are true to each other,
here in this land of peace and beauty, your native country,
we may reap every tranquil blessing— what can disturb our
peace?’
106 Frankenstein
And could not such words from her whom I fondly prized
before every other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the
fiend that lurked in my heart? Even as she spoke I drew near
to her, as if in terror, lest at that very moment the destroyer
had been near to rob me of her.
Thus not the tenderness of friendship, nor the beauty of
earth, nor of heaven, could redeem my soul from woe; the
very accents of love were ineffectual. I was encompassed by
a cloud which no beneficial influence could penetrate. The
wounded deer dragging its fainting limbs to some untrodden
brake, there to gaze upon the arrow which had pierced
it, and to die, was but a type of me.
Sometimes I could cope with the sullen despair that
overwhelmed me, but sometimes the whirlwind passions of
my soul drove me to seek, by bodily exercise and by change
of place, some relief from my intolerable sensations. It was
during an access of this kind that I suddenly left my home,
and bending my steps towards the near Alpine valleys,
sought in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to
forget myself and my ephemeral, because human, sorrows.
My wanderings were directed towards the valley of Chamounix.
I had visited it frequently during my boyhood. Six
years had passed since then: I was a wreck, but nought had
changed in those savage and enduring scenes.
I performed the first part of my journey on horseback. I
afterwards hired a mule, as the more sure-footed and least
liable to receive injury on these rugged roads. The weather
was fine; it was about the middle of the month of August,
nearly two months after the death of Justine, that miserable 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 107
epoch from which I dated all my woe. The weight upon my
spirit was sensibly lightened as I plunged yet deeper in the
ravine of Arve. The immense mountains and precipices that
overhung me on every side, the sound of the river raging
among the rocks, and the dashing of the waterfalls around
spoke of a power mighty as Omnipotence—and I ceased
to fear or to bend before any being less almighty than that
which had created and ruled the elements, here displayed in
their most terrific guise. Still, as I ascended higher, the valley
assumed a more magnificent and astonishing character.
Ruined castles hanging on the precipices of piny mountains,
the impetuous Arve, and cottages every here and there
peeping forth from among the trees formed a scene of singular
beauty. But it was augmented and rendered sublime
by the mighty Alps, whose white and shining pyramids and
domes towered above all, as belonging to another earth, the
habitations of another race of beings.
I passed the bridge of Pelissier, where the ravine, which
the river forms, opened before me, and I began to ascend
the mountain that overhangs it. Soon after, I entered the
valley of Chamounix. This valley is more wonderful and
sublime, but not so beautiful and picturesque as that of
Servox, through which I had just passed. The high and
snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries, but I
saw no more ruined castles and fertile fields. Immense glaciers
approached the road; I heard the rumbling thunder
of the falling avalanche and marked the smoke of its passage.
Mont Blanc, the supreme and magnificent Mont Blanc,
raised itself from the surrounding aiguilles, and its tremen-
108 Frankenstein
dous dome overlooked the valley.
A tingling long-lost sense of pleasure often came across
me during this journey. Some turn in the road, some new
object suddenly perceived and recognized, reminded me
of days gone by, and were associated with the lighthearted
gaiety of boyhood. The very winds whispered in soothing
accents, and maternal Nature bade me weep no more. Then
again the kindly influence ceased to act— I found myself
fettered again to grief and indulging in all the misery of
reflection. Then I spurred on my animal, striving so to forget
the world, my fears, and more than all, myself—or, in a
more desperate fashion, I alighted and threw myself on the
grass, weighed down by horror and despair.
At length I arrived at the village of Chamounix. Exhaustion
succeeded to the extreme fatigue both of body and of
mind which I had endured. For a short space of time I remained
at the window watching the pallid lightnings that
played above Mont Blanc and listening to the rushing of
the Arve, which pursued its noisy way beneath. The same
lulling sounds acted as a lullaby to my too keen sensations;
when I placed my head upon my pillow, sleep crept over me;
I felt it as it came and blessed the giver of oblivion.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 109
Chapter 10
I spent the following day roaming through the valley. I
stood beside the sources of the Arveiron, which take
their rise in a glacier, that with slow pace is advancing
down from the summit of the hills to barricade the valley.
The abrupt sides of vast mountains were before me; the icy
wall of the glacier overhung me; a few shattered pines were
scattered around; and the solemn silence of this glorious
presence-chamber of imperial nature was broken only by
the brawling waves or the fall of some vast fragment, the
thunder sound of the avalanche or the cracking, reverberated
along the mountains, of the accumulated ice, which,
through the silent working of immutable laws, was ever
and anon rent and torn, as if it had been but a plaything in
their hands. These sublime and magnificent scenes afforded
me the greatest consolation that I was capable of receiving.
They elevated me from all littleness of feeling, and although
they did not remove my grief, they subdued and tranquillized
it. In some degree, also, they diverted my mind from
the thoughts over which it had brooded for the last month.
I retired to rest at night; my slumbers, as it were, waited
on and ministered to by the assemblance of grand shapes
which I had contemplated during the day. They congregated
round me; the unstained snowy mountaintop, the glittering
pinnacle, the pine woods, and ragged bare ravine, the 
110 Frankenstein
eagle, soaring amidst the clouds— they all gathered round
me and bade me be at peace.
Where had they fled when the next morning I awoke?
All of soul- inspiriting fled with sleep, and dark melancholy
clouded every thought. The rain was pouring in torrents,
and thick mists hid the summits of the mountains, so that I
even saw not the faces of those mighty friends. Still I would
penetrate their misty veil and seek them in their cloudy
retreats. What were rain and storm to me? My mule was
brought to the door, and I resolved to ascend to the summit
of Montanvert. I remembered the effect that the view
of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced
upon my mind when I first saw it. It had then filled me with
a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the soul and allowed it
to soar from the obscure world to light and joy. The sight of
the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always the effect
of solemnizing my mind and causing me to forget the
passing cares of life. I determined to go without a guide, for
I was well acquainted with the path, and the presence of another
would destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene.
The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual
and short windings, which enable you to surmount the
perpendicularity of the mountain. It is a scene terrifically
desolate. In a thousand spots the traces of the winter avalanche
may be perceived, where trees lie broken and strewed
on the ground, some entirely destroyed, others bent, leaning
upon the jutting rocks of the mountain or transversely
upon other trees. The path, as you ascend nigher, is intersected
by ravines of snow, down which stones continually 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 111
roll from above; one of them is particularly dangerous, as
the slightest sound, such as even speaking in a loud voice,
produces a concussion of air sufficient to draw destruction
upon the head of the speaker. The pines are not tall or luxuriant,
but they are sombre and add an air of severity to the
scene. I looked on the valley beneath; vast mists were rising
from the rivers which ran through it and curling in thick
wreaths around the opposite mountains, whose summits
were hid in the uniform clouds, while rain poured from the
dark sky and added to the melancholy impression I received
from the objects around me. Alas! Why does man boast of
sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only
renders them more necessary beings. If our impulses were
confined to hunger, thirst, and desire, we might be nearly
free; but now we are moved by every wind that blows and a
chance word or scene that that word may convey to us.
We rest; a dream has power to poison sleep.
We rise; one wand’ring thought pollutes the day.
We feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep,
Embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away;
It is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow,
The path of its departure still is free.
Man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow;
Nought may endure but mutability!
It was nearly noon when I arrived at the top of the ascent.
For some time I sat upon the rock that overlooks the
sea of ice. A mist covered both that and the surrounding 
112 Frankenstein
mountains. Presently a breeze dissipated the cloud, and I
descended upon the glacier. The surface is very uneven, rising
like the waves of a troubled sea, descending low, and
interspersed by rifts that sink deep. The field of ice is almost
a league in width, but I spent nearly two hours in crossing
it. The opposite mountain is a bare perpendicular rock.
From the side where I now stood Montanvert was exactly
opposite, at the distance of a league; and above it rose Mont
Blanc, in awful majesty. I remained in a recess of the rock,
gazing on this wonderful and stupendous scene. The sea,
or rather the vast river of ice, wound among its dependent
mountains, whose aerial summits hung over its recesses.
Their icy and glittering peaks shone in the sunlight over the
clouds. My heart, which was before sorrowful, now swelled
with something like joy; I exclaimed, ‘Wandering spirits, if
indeed ye wander, and do not rest in your narrow beds, allow
me this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion,
away from the joys of life.’
As I said this I suddenly beheld the figure of a man, at some
distance, advancing towards me with superhuman speed.
He bounded over the crevices in the ice, among which I had
walked with caution; his stature, also, as he approached,
seemed to exceed that of man. I was troubled; a mist came
over my eyes, and I felt a faintness seize me, but I was quickly
restored by the cold gale of the mountains. I perceived,
as the shape came nearer (sight tremendous and abhorred!)
that it was the wretch whom I had created. I trembled with
rage and horror, resolving to wait his approach and then
close with him in mortal combat. He approached; his coun-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 113
tenance bespoke bitter anguish, combined with disdain and
malignity, while its unearthly ugliness rendered it almost
too horrible for human eyes. But I scarcely observed this;
rage and hatred had at first deprived me of utterance, and I
recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of
furious detestation and contempt.
‘Devil,’ I exclaimed, ‘do you dare approach me? And do
not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on
your miserable head? Begone, vile insect! Or rather, stay,
that I may trample you to dust! And, oh! That I could, with
the extinction of your miserable existence, restore those
victims whom you have so diabolically murdered!’
‘I expected this reception,’ said the daemon. ‘All men
hate the wretched; how, then, must I be hated, who am miserable
beyond all living things! Yet you, my creator, detest
and spurn me, thy creature, to whom thou art bound by
ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of one of us. You
purpose to kill me. How dare you sport thus with life? Do
your duty towards me, and I will do mine towards you and
the rest of mankind. If you will comply with my conditions,
I will leave them and you at peace; but if you refuse, I will
glut the maw of death, until it be satiated with the blood of
your remaining friends.’
‘Abhorred monster! Fiend that thou art! The tortures
of hell are too mild a vengeance for thy crimes. Wretched
devil! You reproach me with your creation, come on, then,
that I may extinguish the spark which I so negligently bestowed.’
My rage was without bounds; I sprang on him, impelled 
114 Frankenstein
by all the feelings which can arm one being against the existence
of another.
He easily eluded me and said—
‘Be calm! I entreat you to hear me before you give vent
to your hatred on my devoted head. Have I not suffered
enough, that you seek to increase my misery? Life, although
it may only be an accumulation of anguish, is dear to me,
and I will defend it. Remember, thou hast made me more
powerful than thyself; my height is superior to thine, my
joints more supple. But I will not be tempted to set myself
in opposition to thee. I am thy creature, and I will be even
mild and docile to my natural lord and king if thou wilt
also perform thy part, the which thou owest me. Oh, Frankenstein,
be not equitable to every other and trample upon
me alone, to whom thy justice, and even thy clemency and
affection, is most due. Remember that I am thy creature;
I ought to be thy Adam, but I am rather the fallen angel,
whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed. Everywhere I
see bliss, from which I alone am irrevocably excluded. I was
benevolent and good; misery made me a fiend. Make me
happy, and I shall again be virtuous.’
‘Begone! I will not hear you. There can be no community
between you and me; we are enemies. Begone, or let us try
our strength in a fight, in which one must fall.’
‘How can I move thee? Will no entreaties cause thee to
turn a favourable eye upon thy creature, who implores thy
goodness and compassion? Believe me, Frankenstein, I was
benevolent; my soul glowed with love and humanity; but
am I not alone, miserably alone? You, my creator, abhor me; 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 115
what hope can I gather from your fellow creatures, who owe
me nothing? They spurn and hate me. The desert mountains
and dreary glaciers are my refuge. I have wandered
here many days; the caves of ice, which I only do not fear,
are a dwelling to me, and the only one which man does not
grudge. These bleak skies I hail, for they are kinder to me
than your fellow beings. If the multitude of mankind knew
of my existence, they would do as you do, and arm themselves
for my destruction. Shall I not then hate them who
abhor me? I will keep no terms with my enemies. I am miserable,
and they shall share my wretchedness. Yet it is in
your power to recompense me, and deliver them from an
evil which it only remains for you to make so great, that not
only you and your family, but thousands of others, shall be
swallowed up in the whirlwinds of its rage. Let your compassion
be moved, and do not disdain me. Listen to my tale;
when you have heard that, abandon or commiserate me, as
you shall judge that I deserve. But hear me. The guilty are
allowed, by human laws, bloody as they are, to speak in
their own defence before they are condemned. Listen to me,
Frankenstein. You accuse me of murder, and yet you would,
with a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. Oh,
praise the eternal justice of man! Yet I ask you not to spare
me; listen to me, and then, if you can, and if you will, destroy
the work of your hands.’
‘Why do you call to my remembrance,’ I rejoined, ‘circumstances
of which I shudder to reflect, that I have been
the miserable origin and author? Cursed be the day, abhorred
devil, in which you first saw light! Cursed (although 
116 Frankenstein
I curse myself) be the hands that formed you! You have
made me wretched beyond expression. You have left me no
power to consider whether I am just to you or not. Begone!
Relieve me from the sight of your detested form.’
‘Thus I relieve thee, my creator,’ he said, and placed his
hated hands before my eyes, which I flung from me with violence;
‘thus I take from thee a sight which you abhor. Still
thou canst listen to me and grant me thy compassion. By
the virtues that I once possessed, I demand this from you.
Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of
this place is not fitting to your fine sensations; come to the
hut upon the mountain. The sun is yet high in the heavens;
before it descends to hide itself behind your snowy precipices
and illuminate another world, you will have heard my
story and can decide. On you it rests, whether I quit forever
the neighbourhood of man and lead a harmless life, or become
the scourge of your fellow creatures and the author of
your own speedy ruin.’
As he said this he led the way across the ice; I followed.
My heart was full, and I did not answer him, but as I proceeded,
I weighed the various arguments that he had used
and determined at least to listen to his tale. I was partly
urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my resolution.
I had hitherto supposed him to be the murderer of my
brother, and I eagerly sought a confirmation or denial of
this opinion. For the first time, also, I felt what the duties
of a creator towards his creature were, and that I ought to
render him happy before I complained of his wickedness.
These motives urged me to comply with his demand. We 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 117
crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite rock.
The air was cold, and the rain again began to descend; we
entered the hut, the fiend with an air of exultation, I with a
heavy heart and depressed spirits. But I consented to listen,
and seating myself by the fire which my odious companion
had lighted, he thus began his tale.
118 Frankenstein
Chapter 11
‘It is with considerable difficulty that I remember the
original era of my being; all the events of that period
appear confused and indistinct. A strange multiplicity of
sensations seized me, and I saw, felt, heard, and smelt at the
same time; and it was, indeed, a long time before I learned
to distinguish between the operations of my various senses.
By degrees, I remember, a stronger light pressed upon
my nerves, so that I was obliged to shut my eyes. Darkness
then came over me and troubled me, but hardly had I felt
this when, by opening my eyes, as I now suppose, the light
poured in upon me again. I walked and, I believe, descended,
but I presently found a great alteration in my sensations.
Before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious
to my touch or sight; but I now found that I could
wander on at liberty, with no obstacles which I could not
either surmount or avoid. The light became more and more
oppressive to me, and the heat wearying me as I walked, I
sought a place where I could receive shade. This was the
forest near Ingolstadt; and here I lay by the side of a brook
resting from my fatigue, until I felt tormented by hunger
and thirst. This roused me from my nearly dormant state,
and I ate some berries which I found hanging on the trees
or lying on the ground. I slaked my thirst at the brook, and
then lying down, was overcome by sleep.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 119
‘It was dark when I awoke; I felt cold also, and half frightened,
as it were, instinctively, finding myself so desolate.
Before I had quitted your apartment, on a sensation of cold,
I had covered myself with some clothes, but these were insufficient
to secure me from the dews of night. I was a poor,
helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could distinguish,
nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, I sat down
and wept.
‘Soon a gentle light stole over the heavens and gave me
a sensation of pleasure. I started up and beheld a radiant
form rise from among the trees.* [*The moon] I gazed with
a kind of wonder. It moved slowly, but it enlightened my
path, and I again went out in search of berries. I was still
cold when under one of the trees I found a huge cloak, with
which I covered myself, and sat down upon the ground. No
distinct ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. I felt
light, and hunger, and thirst, and darkness; innumerable
sounds rang in my ears, and on all sides various scents saluted
me; the only object that I could distinguish was the
bright moon, and I fixed my eyes on that with pleasure.
‘Several changes of day and night passed, and the orb
of night had greatly lessened, when I began to distinguish
my sensations from each other. I gradually saw plainly the
clear stream that supplied me with drink and the trees that
shaded me with their foliage. I was delighted when I first
discovered that a pleasant sound, which often saluted my
ears, proceeded from the throats of the little winged animals
who had often intercepted the light from my eyes. I
began also to observe, with greater accuracy, the forms that 
120 Frankenstein
surrounded me and to perceive the boundaries of the radiant
roof of light which canopied me. Sometimes I tried
to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds but was unable.
Sometimes I wished to express my sensations in my own
mode, but the uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke
from me frightened me into silence again.
‘The moon had disappeared from the night, and again,
with a lessened form, showed itself, while I still remained in
the forest. My sensations had by this time become distinct,
and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes
became accustomed to the light and to perceive objects in
their right forms; I distinguished the insect from the herb,
and by degrees, one herb from another. I found that the
sparrow uttered none but harsh notes, whilst those of the
blackbird and thrush were sweet and enticing.
‘One day, when I was oppressed by cold, I found a fire
which had been left by some wandering beggars, and was
overcome with delight at the warmth I experienced from it.
In my joy I thrust my hand into the live embers, but quickly
drew it out again with a cry of pain. How strange, I thought,
that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! I
examined the materials of the fire, and to my joy found it
to be composed of wood. I quickly collected some branches,
but they were wet and would not burn. I was pained at this
and sat still watching the operation of the fire. The wet wood
which I had placed near the heat dried and itself became
inflamed. I reflected on this, and by touching the various
branches, I discovered the cause and busied myself in collecting
a great quantity of wood, that I might dry it and have 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 121
a plentiful supply of fire. When night came on and brought
sleep with it, I was in the greatest fear lest my fire should
be extinguished. I covered it carefully with dry wood and
leaves and placed wet branches upon it; and then, spreading
my cloak, I lay on the ground and sank into sleep.
‘It was morning when I awoke, and my first care was
to visit the fire. I uncovered it, and a gentle breeze quickly
fanned it into a flame. I observed this also and contrived a
fan of branches, which roused the embers when they were
nearly extinguished. When night came again I found, with
pleasure, that the fire gave light as well as heat and that the
discovery of this element was useful to me in my food, for I
found some of the offals that the travellers had left had been
roasted, and tasted much more savoury than the berries I
gathered from the trees. I tried, therefore, to dress my food
in the same manner, placing it on the live embers. I found
that the berries were spoiled by this operation, and the nuts
and roots much improved.
‘Food, however, became scarce, and I often spent the
whole day searching in vain for a few acorns to assuage the
pangs of hunger. When I found this, I resolved to quit the
place that I had hitherto inhabited, to seek for one where
the few wants I experienced would be more easily satisfied.
In this emigration I exceedingly lamented the loss of
the fire which I had obtained through accident and knew
not how to reproduce it. I gave several hours to the serious
consideration of this difficulty, but I was obliged to relinquish
all attempt to supply it, and wrapping myself up in my
cloak, I struck across the wood towards the setting sun. I 
122 Frankenstein
passed three days in these rambles and at length discovered
the open country. A great fall of snow had taken place the
night before, and the fields were of one uniform white; the
appearance was disconsolate, and I found my feet chilled by
the cold damp substance that covered the ground.
‘It was about seven in the morning, and I longed to obtain
food and shelter; at length I perceived a small hut, on a
rising ground, which had doubtless been built for the convenience
of some shepherd. This was a new sight to me, and
I examined the structure with great curiosity. Finding the
door open, I entered. An old man sat in it, near a fire, over
which he was preparing his breakfast. He turned on hearing
a noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the
hut, ran across the fields with a speed of which his debilitated
form hardly appeared capable. His appearance, different
from any I had ever before seen, and his flight somewhat
surprised me. But I was enchanted by the appearance of the
hut; here the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground
was dry; and it presented to me then as exquisite and divine
a retreat as Pandemonium appeared to the demons of hell
after their sufferings in the lake of fire. I greedily devoured
the remnants of the shepherd’s breakfast, which consisted
of bread, cheese, milk, and wine; the latter, however, I did
not like. Then, overcome by fatigue, I lay down among some
straw and fell asleep.
‘It was noon when I awoke, and allured by the warmth
of the sun, which shone brightly on the white ground, I determined
to recommence my travels; and, depositing the
remains of the peasant’s breakfast in a wallet I found, I pro-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 123
ceeded across the fields for several hours, until at sunset I
arrived at a village. How miraculous did this appear! the
huts, the neater cottages, and stately houses engaged my admiration
by turns. The vegetables in the gardens, the milk
and cheese that I saw placed at the windows of some of
the cottages, allured my appetite. One of the best of these
I entered, but I had hardly placed my foot within the door
before the children shrieked, and one of the women fainted.
The whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me,
until, grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of
missile weapons, I escaped to the open country and fearfully
took refuge in a low hovel, quite bare, and making a wretched
appearance after the palaces I had beheld in the village.
This hovel however, joined a cottage of a neat and pleasant
appearance, but after my late dearly bought experience, I
dared not enter it. My place of refuge was constructed of
wood, but so low that I could with difficulty sit upright in it.
No wood, however, was placed on the earth, which formed
the floor, but it was dry; and although the wind entered it
by innumerable chinks, I found it an agreeable asylum from
the snow and rain.
‘Here, then, I retreated and lay down happy to have
found a shelter, however miserable, from the inclemency of
the season, and still more from the barbarity of man. As
soon as morning dawned I crept from my kennel, that I
might view the adjacent cottage and discover if I could remain
in the habitation I had found. It was situated against
the back of the cottage and surrounded on the sides which
were exposed by a pig sty and a clear pool of water. One part 
124 Frankenstein
was open, and by that I had crept in; but now I covered every
crevice by which I might be perceived with stones and
wood, yet in such a manner that I might move them on occasion
to pass out; all the light I enjoyed came through the
sty, and that was sufficient for me.
‘Having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with
clean straw, I retired, for I saw the figure of a man at a distance,
and I remembered too well my treatment the night
before to trust myself in his power. I had first, however, provided
for my sustenance for that day by a loaf of coarse bread,
which I purloined, and a cup with which I could drink more
conveniently than from my hand of the pure water which
flowed by my retreat. The floor was a little raised, so that it
was kept perfectly dry, and by its vicinity to the chimney of
the cottage it was tolerably warm.
‘Being thus provided, I resolved to reside in this hovel
until something should occur which might alter my determination.
It was indeed a paradise compared to the bleak
forest, my former residence, the rain-dropping branches,
and dank earth. I ate my breakfast with pleasure and
was about to remove a plank to procure myself a little water
when I heard a step, and looking through a small chink,
I beheld a young creature, with a pail on her head, passing
before my hovel. The girl was young and of gentle
demeanour, unlike what I have since found cottagers and
farmhouse servants to be. Yet she was meanly dressed, a
coarse blue petticoat and a linen jacket being her only garb;
her fair hair was plaited but not adorned: she looked patient
yet sad. I lost sight of her, and in about a quarter of an hour 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 125
she returned bearing the pail, which was now partly filled
with milk. As she walked along, seemingly incommoded by
the burden, a young man met her, whose countenance expressed
a deeper despondence. Uttering a few sounds with
an air of melancholy, he took the pail from her head and
bore it to the cottage himself. She followed, and they disappeared.
Presently I saw the young man again, with some
tools in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and
the girl was also busied, sometimes in the house and sometimes
in the yard.
‘On examining my dwelling, I found that one of the windows
of the cottage had formerly occupied a part of it, but
the panes had been filled up with wood. In one of these was
a small and almost imperceptible chink through which the
eye could just penetrate. Through this crevice a small room
was visible, whitewashed and clean but very bare of furniture.
In one corner, near a small fire, sat an old man, leaning
his head on his hands in a disconsolate attitude. The young
girl was occupied in arranging the cottage; but presently
she took something out of a drawer, which employed her
hands, and she sat down beside the old man, who, taking up
an instrument, began to play and to produce sounds sweeter
than the voice of the thrush or the nightingale. It was
a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had never beheld
aught beautiful before. The silver hair and benevolent
countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while
the gentle manners of the girl enticed my love. He played a
sweet mournful air which I perceived drew tears from the
eyes of his amiable companion, of which the old man took 
126 Frankenstein
no notice, until she sobbed audibly; he then pronounced a
few sounds, and the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt
at his feet. He raised her and smiled with such kindness
and affection that I felt sensations of a peculiar and overpowering
nature; they were a mixture of pain and pleasure,
such as I had never before experienced, either from hunger
or cold, warmth or food; and I withdrew from the window,
unable to bear these emotions.
‘Soon after this the young man returned, bearing on
his shoulders a load of wood. The girl met him at the door,
helped to relieve him of his burden, and taking some of the
fuel into the cottage, placed it on the fire; then she and the
youth went apart into a nook of the cottage, and he showed
her a large loaf and a piece of cheese. She seemed pleased
and went into the garden for some roots and plants, which
she placed in water, and then upon the fire. She afterwards
continued her work, whilst the young man went into the
garden and appeared busily employed in digging and pulling
up roots. After he had been employed thus about an
hour, the young woman joined him and they entered the
cottage together.
‘The old man had, in the meantime, been pensive, but
on the appearance of his companions he assumed a more
cheerful air, and they sat down to eat. The meal was quickly
dispatched. The young woman was again occupied in
arranging the cottage, the old man walked before the cottage
in the sun for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of
the youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast
between these two excellent creatures. One was old, with 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 127
silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence
and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his figure,
and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry,
yet his eyes and attitude expressed the utmost sadness and
despondency. The old man returned to the cottage, and the
youth, with tools different from those he had used in the
morning, directed his steps across the fields.
‘Night quickly shut in, but to my extreme wonder, I found
that the cottagers had a means of prolonging light by the
use of tapers, and was delighted to find that the setting of
the sun did not put an end to the pleasure I experienced in
watching my human neighbours. In the evening the young
girl and her companion were employed in various occupations
which I did not understand; and the old man again
took up the instrument which produced the divine sounds
that had enchanted me in the morning. So soon as he had
finished, the youth began, not to play, but to utter sounds
that were monotonous, and neither resembling the harmony
of the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds;
I since found that he read aloud, but at that time I knew
nothing of the science of words or letters.
‘The family, after having been thus occupied for a short
time, extinguished their lights and retired, as I conjectured,
to rest.’
128 Frankenstein
Chapter 12
‘I lay on my straw, but I could not sleep. I thought of the
occurrences of the day. What chiefly struck me was the
gentle manners of these people, and I longed to join them,
but dared not. I remembered too well the treatment I had
suffered the night before from the barbarous villagers, and
resolved, whatever course of conduct I might hereafter
think it right to pursue, that for the present I would remain
quietly in my hovel, watching and endeavouring to discover
the motives which influenced their actions.
‘The cottagers arose the next morning before the sun.
The young woman arranged the cottage and prepared the
food, and the youth departed after the first meal.
‘This day was passed in the same routine as that which
preceded it. The young man was constantly employed out
of doors, and the girl in various laborious occupations
within. The old man, whom I soon perceived to be blind,
employed his leisure hours on his instrument or in contemplation.
Nothing could exceed the love and respect which
the younger cottagers exhibited towards their venerable
companion. They performed towards him every little office
of affection and duty with gentleness, and he rewarded
them by his benevolent smiles.
‘They were not entirely happy. The young man and his
companion often went apart and appeared to weep. I saw 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 129
no cause for their unhappiness, but I was deeply affected by
it. If such lovely creatures were miserable, it was less strange
that I, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched.
Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? They possessed
a delightful house (for such it was in my eyes) and every
luxury; they had a fire to warm them when chill and delicious
viands when hungry; they were dressed in excellent
clothes; and, still more, they enjoyed one another’s company
and speech, interchanging each day looks of affection
and kindness. What did their tears imply? Did they really
express pain? I was at first unable to solve these questions,
but perpetual attention and time explained to me many appearances
which were at first enigmatic.
‘A considerable period elapsed before I discovered one of
the causes of the uneasiness of this amiable family: it was
poverty, and they suffered that evil in a very distressing degree.
Their nourishment consisted entirely of the vegetables
of their garden and the milk of one cow, which gave very
little during the winter, when its masters could scarcely
procure food to support it. They often, I believe, suffered the
pangs of hunger very poignantly, especially the two younger
cottagers, for several times they placed food before the
old man when they reserved none for themselves.
‘This trait of kindness moved me sensibly. I had been accustomed,
during the night, to steal a part of their store for
my own consumption, but when I found that in doing this
I inflicted pain on the cottagers, I abstained and satisfied
myself with berries, nuts, and roots which I gathered from
a neighbouring wood.
130 Frankenstein
‘I discovered also another means through which I was
enabled to assist their labours. I found that the youth spent
a great part of each day in collecting wood for the family
fire, and during the night I often took his tools, the use of
which I quickly discovered, and brought home firing sufficient
for the consumption of several days.
‘I remember, the first time that I did this, the young
woman, when she opened the door in the morning, appeared
greatly astonished on seeing a great pile of wood on
the outside. She uttered some words in a loud voice, and the
youth joined her, who also expressed surprise. I observed,
with pleasure, that he did not go to the forest that day, but
spent it in repairing the cottage and cultivating the garden.
‘By degrees I made a discovery of still greater moment. I
found that these people possessed a method of communicating
their experience and feelings to one another by articulate
sounds. I perceived that the words they spoke sometimes
produced pleasure or pain, smiles or sadness, in the minds
and countenances of the hearers. This was indeed a godlike
science, and I ardently desired to become acquainted with
it. But I was baffled in every attempt I made for this purpose.
Their pronunciation was quick, and the words they
uttered, not having any apparent connection with visible
objects, I was unable to discover any clue by which I could
unravel the mystery of their reference. By great application,
however, and after having remained during the space of several
revolutions of the moon in my hovel, I discovered the
names that were given to some of the most familiar objects
of discourse; I learned and applied the words, ‘fire,’ ‘milk,’ 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 131
‘bread,’ and ‘wood.’ I learned also the names of the cottagers
themselves. The youth and his companion had each of
them several names, but the old man had only one, which
was ‘father.’ The girl was called ‘sister’ or ‘Agatha,’ and the
youth ‘Felix,’ ‘brother,’ or ‘son.’ I cannot describe the delight
I felt when I learned the ideas appropriated to each of these
sounds and was able to pronounce them. I distinguished
several other words without being able as yet to understand
or apply them, such as ‘good,’ ‘dearest,’ unhappy.
‘I spent the winter in this manner. The gentle manners
and beauty of the cottagers greatly endeared them to me;
when they were unhappy, I felt depressed; when they rejoiced,
I sympathized in their joys. I saw few human beings
besides them, and if any other happened to enter the cottage,
their harsh manners and rude gait only enhanced to
me the superior accomplishments of my friends. The old
man, I could perceive, often endeavoured to encourage his
children, as sometimes I found that he called them, to cast
off their melancholy. He would talk in a cheerful accent,
with an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure even
upon me. Agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes
filled with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe away unperceived;
but I generally found that her countenance and
tone were more cheerful after having listened to the exhortations
of her father. It was not thus with Felix. He was
always the saddest of the group, and even to my unpractised
senses, he appeared to have suffered more deeply than
his friends. But if his countenance was more sorrowful, his
voice was more cheerful than that of his sister, especially 
132 Frankenstein
when he addressed the old man.
‘I could mention innumerable instances which, although
slight, marked the dispositions of these amiable cottagers.
In the midst of poverty and want, Felix carried with pleasure
to his sister the first little white flower that peeped out
from beneath the snowy ground. Early in the morning, before
she had risen, he cleared away the snow that obstructed
her path to the milk-house, drew water from the well, and
brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual
astonishment, he found his store always replenished by
an invisible hand. In the day, I believe, he worked sometimes
for a neighbouring farmer, because he often went
forth and did not return until dinner, yet brought no wood
with him. At other times he worked in the garden, but as
there was little to do in the frosty season, he read to the old
man and Agatha.
‘This reading had puzzled me extremely at first, but by degrees
I discovered that he uttered many of the same sounds
when he read as when he talked. I conjectured, therefore,
that he found on the paper signs for speech which he understood,
and I ardently longed to comprehend these also;
but how was that possible when I did not even understand
the sounds for which they stood as signs? I improved, however,
sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow
up any kind of conversation, although I applied my whole
mind to the endeavour, for I easily perceived that, although
I eagerly longed to discover myself to the cottagers, I ought
not to make the attempt until I had first become master of
their language, which knowledge might enable me to make 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 133
them overlook the deformity of my figure, for with this also
the contrast perpetually presented to my eyes had made me
acquainted.
‘I had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers—their
grace, beauty, and delicate complexions; but how was I terrified
when I viewed myself in a transparent pool! At first I
started back, unable to believe that it was indeed I who was
reflected in the mirror; and when I became fully convinced
that I was in reality the monster that I am, I was filled with
the bitterest sensations of despondence and mortification.
Alas! I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable
deformity.
‘As the sun became warmer and the light of day longer,
the snow vanished, and I beheld the bare trees and the
black earth. From this time Felix was more employed, and
the heart-moving indications of impending famine disappeared.
Their food, as I afterwards found, was coarse, but it
was wholesome; and they procured a sufficiency of it. Several
new kinds of plants sprang up in the garden, which they
dressed; and these signs of comfort increased daily as the
season advanced.
‘The old man, leaning on his son, walked each day at
noon, when it did not rain, as I found it was called when the
heavens poured forth its waters. This frequently took place,
but a high wind quickly dried the earth, and the season became
far more pleasant than it had been.
‘My mode of life in my hovel was uniform. During the
morning I attended the motions of the cottagers, and when
they were dispersed in various occupations, I slept; the 
134 Frankenstein
remainder of the day was spent in observing my friends.
When they had retired to rest, if there was any moon or the
night was star-light, I went into the woods and collected my
own food and fuel for the cottage. When I returned, as often
as it was necessary, I cleared their path from the snow
and performed those offices that I had seen done by Felix.
I afterwards found that these labours, performed by an invisible
hand, greatly astonished them; and once or twice
I heard them, on these occasions, utter the words ‘good
spirit,’ ‘wonderful’; but I did not then understand the signification
of these terms.
‘My thoughts now became more active, and I longed to
discover the motives and feelings of these lovely creatures;
I was inquisitive to know why Felix appeared so miserable
and Agatha so sad. I thought (foolish wretch!) that it might
be in my power to restore happiness to these deserving people.
When I slept or was absent, the forms of the venerable
blind father, the gentle Agatha, and the excellent Felix flitted
before me. I looked upon them as superior beings who
would be the arbiters of my future destiny. I formed in my
imagination a thousand pictures of presenting myself to
them, and their reception of me. I imagined that they would
be disgusted, until, by my gentle demeanour and conciliating
words, I should first win their favour and afterwards
their love.
‘These thoughts exhilarated me and led me to apply with
fresh ardour to the acquiring the art of language. My organs
were indeed harsh, but supple; and although my voice was
very unlike the soft music of their tones, yet I pronounced 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 135
such words as I understood with tolerable ease. It was as
the ass and the lap-dog; yet surely the gentle ass whose intentions
were affectionate, although his manners were rude,
deserved better treatment than blows and execration.
‘The pleasant showers and genial warmth of spring
greatly altered the aspect of the earth. Men who before this
change seemed to have been hid in caves dispersed themselves
and were employed in various arts of cultivation. The
birds sang in more cheerful notes, and the leaves began to
bud forth on the trees. Happy, happy earth! Fit habitation
for gods, which, so short a time before, was bleak, damp,
and unwholesome. My spirits were elevated by the enchanting
appearance of nature; the past was blotted from my
memory, the present was tranquil, and the future gilded by
bright rays of hope and anticipations of joy.’
136 Frankenstein
Chapter 13
‘I now hasten to the more moving part of my story. I shall
relate events that impressed me with feelings which,
from what I had been, have made me what I am.
‘Spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine and
the skies cloudless. It surprised me that what before was
desert and gloomy should now bloom with the most beautiful
flowers and verdure. My senses were gratified and
refreshed by a thousand scents of delight and a thousand
sights of beauty.
‘It was on one of these days, when my cottagers periodically
rested from labour—the old man played on his guitar,
and the children listened to him—that I observed the countenance
of Felix was melancholy beyond expression; he
sighed frequently, and once his father paused in his music,
and I conjectured by his manner that he inquired the cause
of his son’s sorrow. Felix replied in a cheerful accent, and
the old man was recommencing his music when someone
tapped at the door.
‘It was a lady on horseback, accompanied by a countryman
as a guide. The lady was dressed in a dark suit and
covered with a thick black veil. Agatha asked a question, to
which the stranger only replied by pronouncing, in a sweet
accent, the name of Felix. Her voice was musical but unlike
that of either of my friends. On hearing this word, Felix 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 137
came up hastily to the lady, who, when she saw him, threw
up her veil, and I beheld a countenance of angelic beauty and
expression. Her hair of a shining raven black, and curiously
braided; her eyes were dark, but gentle, although animated;
her features of a regular proportion, and her complexion
wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with a lovely pink.
‘Felix seemed ravished with delight when he saw her, every
trait of sorrow vanished from his face, and it instantly
expressed a degree of ecstatic joy, of which I could hardly
have believed it capable; his eyes sparkled, as his cheek
flushed with pleasure; and at that moment I thought him as
beautiful as the stranger. She appeared affected by different
feelings; wiping a few tears from her lovely eyes, she held
out her hand to Felix, who kissed it rapturously and called
her, as well as I could distinguish, his sweet Arabian. She
did not appear to understand him, but smiled. He assisted
her to dismount, and dismissing her guide, conducted
her into the cottage. Some conversation took place between
him and his father, and the young stranger knelt at the old
man’s feet and would have kissed his hand, but he raised her
and embraced her affectionately.
‘I soon perceived that although the stranger uttered articulate
sounds and appeared to have a language of her own,
she was neither understood by nor herself understood the
cottagers. They made many signs which I did not comprehend,
but I saw that her presence diffused gladness through
the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissipates
the morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy and
with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the 
138 Frankenstein
ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands of the lovely stranger,
and pointing to her brother, made signs which appeared
to me to mean that he had been sorrowful until she came.
Some hours passed thus, while they, by their countenances,
expressed joy, the cause of which I did not comprehend.
Presently I found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound
which the stranger repeated after them, that she was endeavouring
to learn their language; and the idea instantly
occurred to me that I should make use of the same instructions
to the same end. The stranger learned about twenty
words at the first lesson; most of them, indeed, were those
which I had before understood, but I profited by the others.
‘As night came on, Agatha and the Arabian retired early.
When they separated Felix kissed the hand of the stranger
and said, ‘Good night sweet Safie.’ He sat up much longer,
conversing with his father, and by the frequent repetition
of her name I conjectured that their lovely guest was the
subject of their conversation. I ardently desired to understand
them, and bent every faculty towards that purpose,
but found it utterly impossible.
‘The next morning Felix went out to his work, and after
the usual occupations of Agatha were finished, the Arabian
sat at the feet of the old man, and taking his guitar, played
some airs so entrancingly beautiful that they at once drew
tears of sorrow and delight from my eyes. She sang, and her
voice flowed in a rich cadence, swelling or dying away like a
nightingale of the woods.
‘When she had finished, she gave the guitar to Agatha,
who at first declined it. She played a simple air, and her voice 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 139
accompanied it in sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous
strain of the stranger. The old man appeared enraptured
and said some words which Agatha endeavoured to explain
to Safie, and by which he appeared to wish to express that
she bestowed on him the greatest delight by her music.
‘The days now passed as peaceably as before, with the sole
alteration that joy had taken place of sadness in the countenances
of my friends. Safie was always gay and happy;
she and I improved rapidly in the knowledge of language,
so that in two months I began to comprehend most of the
words uttered by my protectors.
‘In the meanwhile also the black ground was covered
with herbage, and the green banks interspersed with innumerable
flowers, sweet to the scent and the eyes, stars of
pale radiance among the moonlight woods; the sun became
warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my nocturnal rambles
were an extreme pleasure to me, although they were
considerably shortened by the late setting and early rising
of the sun, for I never ventured abroad during daylight,
fearful of meeting with the same treatment I had formerly
endured in the first village which I entered.
‘My days were spent in close attention, that I might more
speedily master the language; and I may boast that I improved
more rapidly than the Arabian, who understood
very little and conversed in broken accents, whilst I comprehended
and could imitate almost every word that was
spoken.
‘While I improved in speech, I also learned the science of
letters as it was taught to the stranger, and this opened be-
140 Frankenstein
fore me a wide field for wonder and delight.
‘The book from which Felix instructed Safie was Volney’s
Ruins of Empires. I should not have understood the purport
of this book had not Felix, in reading it, given very minute
explanations. He had chosen this work, he said, because the
declamatory style was framed in imitation of the Eastern
authors. Through this work I obtained a cursory knowledge
of history and a view of the several empires at present existing
in the world; it gave me an insight into the manners,
governments, and religions of the different nations of the
earth. I heard of the slothful Asiatics, of the stupendous genius
and mental activity of the Grecians, of the wars and
wonderful virtue of the early Romans—of their subsequent
degenerating—of the decline of that mighty empire, of chivalry,
Christianity, and kings. I heard of the discovery of the
American hemisphere and wept with Safie over the hapless
fate of its original inhabitants.
‘These wonderful narrations inspired me with strange
feelings. Was man, indeed, at once so powerful, so virtuous
and magnificent, yet so vicious and base? He appeared at
one time a mere scion of the evil principle and at another as
all that can be conceived of noble and godlike. To be a great
and virtuous man appeared the highest honour that can befall
a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on
record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, a condition
more abject than that of the blind mole or harmless
worm. For a long time I could not conceive how one man
could go forth to murder his fellow, or even why there were
laws and governments; but when I heard details of vice and 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 141
bloodshed, my wonder ceased and I turned away with disgust
and loathing.
‘Every conversation of the cottagers now opened new
wonders to me. While I listened to the instructions which
Felix bestowed upon the Arabian, the strange system of human
society was explained to me. I heard of the division of
property, of immense wealth and squalid poverty, of rank,
descent, and noble blood.
‘The words induced me to turn towards myself. I learned
that the possessions most esteemed by your fellow creatures
were high and unsullied descent united with riches. A man
might be respected with only one of these advantages, but
without either he was considered, except in very rare instances,
as a vagabond and a slave, doomed to waste his
powers for the profits of the chosen few! And what was I?
Of my creation and creator I was absolutely ignorant, but
I knew that I possessed no money, no friends, no kind of
property. I was, besides, endued with a figure hideously deformed
and loathsome; I was not even of the same nature
as man. I was more agile than they and could subsist upon
coarser diet; I bore the extremes of heat and cold with less
injury to my frame; my stature far exceeded theirs. When I
looked around I saw and heard of none like me. Was I, then,
a monster, a blot upon the earth, from which all men fled
and whom all men disowned?
‘I cannot describe to you the agony that these reflections
inflicted upon me; I tried to dispel them, but sorrow only
increased with knowledge. Oh, that I had forever remained
in my native wood, nor known nor felt beyond the sensa-
142 Frankenstein
tions of hunger, thirst, and heat!
‘Of what a strange nature is knowledge! It clings to the
mind when it has once seized on it like a lichen on the rock.
I wished sometimes to shake off all thought and feeling, but
I learned that there was but one means to overcome the sensation
of pain, and that was death—a state which I feared
yet did not understand. I admired virtue and good feelings
and loved the gentle manners and amiable qualities of my
cottagers, but I was shut out from intercourse with them,
except through means which I obtained by stealth, when I
was unseen and unknown, and which rather increased than
satisfied the desire I had of becoming one among my fellows.
The gentle words of Agatha and the animated smiles of the
charming Arabian were not for me. The mild exhortations
of the old man and the lively conversation of the loved Felix
were not for me. Miserable, unhappy wretch!
‘Other lessons were impressed upon me even more deeply.
I heard of the difference of sexes, and the birth and growth
of children, how the father doted on the smiles of the infant,
and the lively sallies of the older child, how all the life and
cares of the mother were wrapped up in the precious charge,
how the mind of youth expanded and gained knowledge, of
brother, sister, and all the various relationships which bind
one human being to another in mutual bonds.
‘But where were my friends and relations? No father had
watched my infant days, no mother had blessed me with
smiles and caresses; or if they had, all my past life was now
a blot, a blind vacancy in which I distinguished nothing.
From my earliest remembrance I had been as I then was in 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 143
height and proportion. I had never yet seen a being resembling
me or who claimed any intercourse with me. What
was I? The question again recurred, to be answered only
with groans.
‘I will soon explain to what these feelings tended, but allow
me now to return to the cottagers, whose story excited
in me such various feelings of indignation, delight, and
wonder, but which all terminated in additional love and
reverence for my protectors (for so I loved, in an innocent,
half-painful self-deceit, to call them).’
144 Frankenstein
Chapter 14
‘Some time elapsed before I learned the history of my
friends. It was one which could not fail to impress itself
deeply on my mind, unfolding as it did a number of
circumstances, each interesting and wonderful to one so
utterly inexperienced as I was.
‘The name of the old man was De Lacey. He was descended
from a good family in France, where he had lived
for many years in affluence, respected by his superiors and
beloved by his equals. His son was bred in the service of his
country, and Agatha had ranked with ladies of the highest
distinction. A few months before my arrival they had lived
in a large and luxurious city called Paris, surrounded by
friends and possessed of every enjoyment which virtue, refinement
of intellect, or taste, accompanied by a moderate
fortune, could afford.
‘The father of Safie had been the cause of their ruin. He
was a Turkish merchant and had inhabited Paris for many
years, when, for some reason which I could not learn, he
became obnoxious to the government. He was seized and
cast into prison the very day that Safie arrived from Constantinople
to join him. He was tried and condemned to
death. The injustice of his sentence was very flagrant; all
Paris was indignant; and it was judged that his religion and
wealth rather than the crime alleged against him had been 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 145
the cause of his condemnation.
‘Felix had accidentally been present at the trial; his horror
and indignation were uncontrollable when he heard the decision
of the court. He made, at that moment, a solemn vow
to deliver him and then looked around for the means. After
many fruitless attempts to gain admittance to the prison,
he found a strongly grated window in an unguarded part
of the building, which lighted the dungeon of the unfortunate
Muhammadan, who, loaded with chains, waited in
despair the execution of the barbarous sentence. Felix visited
the grate at night and made known to the prisoner his
intentions in his favour. The Turk, amazed and delighted,
endeavoured to kindle the zeal of his deliverer by promises
of reward and wealth. Felix rejected his offers with contempt,
yet when he saw the lovely Safie, who was allowed to
visit her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively
gratitude, the youth could not help owning to his own mind
that the captive possessed a treasure which would fully reward
his toil and hazard.
‘The Turk quickly perceived the impression that his
daughter had made on the heart of Felix and endeavoured
to secure him more entirely in his interests by the promise
of her hand in marriage so soon as he should be conveyed
to a place of safety. Felix was too delicate to accept this offer,
yet he looked forward to the probability of the event as to
the consummation of his happiness.
‘During the ensuing days, while the preparations were
going forward for the escape of the merchant, the zeal of
Felix was warmed by several letters that he received from 
146 Frankenstein
this lovely girl, who found means to express her thoughts in
the language of her lover by the aid of an old man, a servant
of her father who understood French. She thanked him in
the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her
parent, and at the same time she gently deplored her own
fate.
‘I have copies of these letters, for I found means, during
my residence in the hovel, to procure the implements
of writing; and the letters were often in the hands of Felix
or Agatha. Before I depart I will give them to you; they
will prove the truth of my tale; but at present, as the sun is
already far declined, I shall only have time to repeat the
substance of them to you.
‘Safie related that her mother was a Christian Arab, seized
and made a slave by the Turks; recommended by her beauty,
she had won the heart of the father of Safie, who married
her. The young girl spoke in high and enthusiastic terms of
her mother, who, born in freedom, spurned the bondage to
which she was now reduced. She instructed her daughter in
the tenets of her religion and taught her to aspire to higher
powers of intellect and an independence of spirit forbidden
to the female followers of Muhammad. This lady died, but
her lessons were indelibly impressed on the mind of Safie,
who sickened at the prospect of again returning to Asia and
being immured within the walls of a harem, allowed only
to occupy herself with infantile amusements, ill-suited to
the temper of her soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and
a noble emulation for virtue. The prospect of marrying a
Christian and remaining in a country where women were 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 147
allowed to take a rank in society was enchanting to her.
‘The day for the execution of the Turk was fixed, but on
the night previous to it he quitted his prison and before
morning was distant many leagues from Paris. Felix had
procured passports in the name of his father, sister, and
himself. He had previously communicated his plan to the
former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under
the pretence of a journey and concealed himself, with his
daughter, in an obscure part of Paris.
‘Felix conducted the fugitives through France to Lyons
and across Mont Cenis to Leghorn, where the merchant had
decided to wait a favourable opportunity of passing into
some part of the Turkish dominions.
‘Safie resolved to remain with her father until the moment
of his departure, before which time the Turk renewed
his promise that she should be united to his deliverer; and
Felix remained with them in expectation of that event; and
in the meantime he enjoyed the society of the Arabian, who
exhibited towards him the simplest and tenderest affection.
They conversed with one another through the means of an
interpreter, and sometimes with the interpretation of looks;
and Safie sang to him the divine airs of her native country.
‘The Turk allowed this intimacy to take place and encouraged
the hopes of the youthful lovers, while in his heart
he had formed far other plans. He loathed the idea that his
daughter should be united to a Christian, but he feared the
resentment of Felix if he should appear lukewarm, for he
knew that he was still in the power of his deliverer if he
should choose to betray him to the Italian state which they 
148 Frankenstein
inhabited. He revolved a thousand plans by which he should
be enabled to prolong the deceit until it might be no longer
necessary, and secretly to take his daughter with him when
he departed. His plans were facilitated by the news which
arrived from Paris.
‘The government of France were greatly enraged at the
escape of their victim and spared no pains to detect and
punish his deliverer. The plot of Felix was quickly discovered,
and DeLacey and Agatha were thrown into prison.
The news reached Felix and roused him from his dream of
pleasure. His blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay
in a noisome dungeon while he enjoyed the free air and the
society of her whom he loved. This idea was torture to him.
He quickly arranged with the Turk that if the latter should
find a favourable opportunity for escape before Felix could
return to Italy, Safie should remain as a boarder at a convent
at Leghorn; and then, quitting the lovely Arabian, he
hastened to Paris and delivered himself up to the vengeance
of the law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha by this proceeding.
‘He did not succeed. They remained confined for five
months before the trial took place, the result of which deprived
them of their fortune and condemned them to a
perpetual exile from their native country.
‘They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in Germany,
where I discovered them. Felix soon learned that
the treacherous Turk, for whom he and his family endured
such unheard-of oppression, on discovering that his deliverer
was thus reduced to poverty and ruin, became a traitor 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 149
to good feeling and honour and had quitted Italy with his
daughter, insultingly sending Felix a pittance of money to
aid him, as he said, in some plan of future maintenance.
‘Such were the events that preyed on the heart of Felix
and rendered him, when I first saw him, the most miserable
of his family. He could have endured poverty, and while
this distress had been the meed of his virtue, he gloried in
it; but the ingratitude of the Turk and the loss of his beloved
Safie were misfortunes more bitter and irreparable. The arrival
of the Arabian now infused new life into his soul.
‘When the news reached Leghorn that Felix was deprived
of his wealth and rank, the merchant commanded
his daughter to think no more of her lover, but to prepare to
return to her native country. The generous nature of Safie
was outraged by this command; she attempted to expostulate
with her father, but he left her angrily, reiterating his
tyrannical mandate.
‘A few days after, the Turk entered his daughter’s apartment
and told her hastily that he had reason to believe that
his residence at Leghorn had been divulged and that he
should speedily be delivered up to the French government;
he had consequently hired a vessel to convey him to Constantinople,
for which city he should sail in a few hours. He
intended to leave his daughter under the care of a confidential
servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of
his property, which had not yet arrived at Leghorn.
‘When alone, Safie resolved in her own mind the plan of
conduct that it would become her to pursue in this emergency.
A residence in Turkey was abhorrent to her; her religion 
150 Frankenstein
and her feelings were alike averse to it. By some papers of
her father which fell into her hands she heard of the exile of
her lover and learnt the name of the spot where he then resided.
She hesitated some time, but at length she formed her
determination. Taking with her some jewels that belonged
to her and a sum of money, she quitted Italy with an attendant,
a native of Leghorn, but who understood the common
language of Turkey, and departed for Germany.
‘She arrived in safety at a town about twenty leagues from
the cottage of De Lacey, when her attendant fell dangerously
ill. Safie nursed her with the most devoted affection, but the
poor girl died, and the Arabian was left alone, unacquainted
with the language of the country and utterly ignorant of
the customs of the world. She fell, however, into good hands.
The Italian had mentioned the name of the spot for which
they were bound, and after her death the woman of the
house in which they had lived took care that Safie should
arrive in safety at the cottage of her lover.’
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 151
Chapter 15
‘Such was the history of my beloved cottagers. It impressed
me deeply. I learned, from the views of social
life which it developed, to admire their virtues and to deprecate
the vices of mankind.
‘As yet I looked upon crime as a distant evil, benevolence
and generosity were ever present before me, inciting within
me a desire to become an actor in the busy scene where so
many admirable qualities were called forth and displayed.
But in giving an account of the progress of my intellect, I
must not omit a circumstance which occurred in the beginning
of the month of August of the same year.
‘One night during my accustomed visit to the neighbouring
wood where I collected my own food and brought home
firing for my protectors, I found on the ground a leathern
portmanteau containing several articles of dress and some
books. I eagerly seized the prize and returned with it to my
hovel. Fortunately the books were written in the language,
the elements of which I had acquired at the cottage; they
consisted of Paradise Lost, a volume of Plutarch’s Lives, and
the Sorrows of Werter. The possession of these treasures
gave me extreme delight; I now continually studied and
exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst my friends
were employed in their ordinary occupations.
‘I can hardly describe to you the effect of these books. 
152 Frankenstein
They produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings,
that sometimes raised me to ecstasy, but more frequently
sunk me into the lowest dejection. In the Sorrows of Werter,
besides the interest of its simple and affecting story, so
many opinions are canvassed and so many lights thrown
upon what had hitherto been to me obscure subjects that
I found in it a never-ending source of speculation and astonishment.
The gentle and domestic manners it described,
combined with lofty sentiments and feelings, which had
for their object something out of self, accorded well with
my experience among my protectors and with the wants
which were forever alive in my own bosom. But I thought
Werter himself a more divine being than I had ever beheld
or imagined; his character contained no pretension, but it
sank deep. The disquisitions upon death and suicide were
calculated to fill me with wonder. I did not pretend to enter
into the merits of the case, yet I inclined towards the opinions
of the hero, whose extinction I wept, without precisely
understanding it.
‘As I read, however, I applied much personally to my
own feelings and condition. I found myself similar yet at
the same time strangely unlike to the beings concerning
whom I read and to whose conversation I was a listener. I
sympathized with and partly understood them, but I was
unformed in mind; I was dependent on none and related
to none. ‘The path of my departure was free,’ and there was
none to lament my annihilation. My person was hideous
and my stature gigantic. What did this mean? Who was I?
What was I? Whence did I come? What was my destination? 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 153
These questions continually recurred, but I was unable to
solve them.
‘The volume of Plutarch’s Lives which I possessed contained
the histories of the first founders of the ancient
republics. This book had a far different effect upon me from
the Sorrows of Werter. I learned from Werter’s imaginations
despondency and gloom, but Plutarch taught me high
thoughts; he elevated me above the wretched sphere of my
own reflections, to admire and love the heroes of past ages.
Many things I read surpassed my understanding and experience.
I had a very confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide
extents of country, mighty rivers, and boundless seas. But
I was perfectly unacquainted with towns and large assemblages
of men. The cottage of my protectors had been the
only school in which I had studied human nature, but this
book developed new and mightier scenes of action. I read of
men concerned in public affairs, governing or massacring
their species. I felt the greatest ardour for virtue rise within
me, and abhorrence for vice, as far as I understood the
signification of those terms, relative as they were, as I applied
them, to pleasure and pain alone. Induced by these
feelings, I was of course led to admire peaceable lawgivers,
Numa, Solon, and Lycurgus, in preference to Romulus and
Theseus. The patriarchal lives of my protectors caused these
impressions to take a firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my
first introduction to humanity had been made by a young
soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should have been
imbued with different sensations.
‘But Paradise Lost excited different and far deeper emo-
154 Frankenstein
tions. I read it, as I had read the other volumes which had
fallen into my hands, as a true history. It moved every feeling
of wonder and awe that the picture of an omnipotent
God warring with his creatures was capable of exciting. I often
referred the several situations, as their similarity struck
me, to my own. Like Adam, I was apparently united by no
link to any other being in existence; but his state was far different
from mine in every other respect. He had come forth
from the hands of God a perfect creature, happy and prosperous,
guarded by the especial care of his Creator; he was
allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from beings
of a superior nature, but I was wretched, helpless, and
alone. Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem
of my condition, for often, like him, when I viewed the bliss
of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me.
‘Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed
these feelings. Soon after my arrival in the hovel I discovered
some papers in the pocket of the dress which I had
taken from your laboratory. At first I had neglected them,
but now that I was able to decipher the characters in which
they were written, I began to study them with diligence. It
was your journal of the four months that preceded my creation.
You minutely described in these papers every step
you took in the progress of your work; this history was mingled
with accounts of domestic occurrences. You doubtless
recollect these papers. Here they are. Everything is related
in them which bears reference to my accursed origin;
the whole detail of that series of disgusting circumstances
which produced it is set in view; the minutest description 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 155
of my odious and loathsome person is given, in language
which painted your own horrors and rendered mine indelible.
I sickened as I read. ‘Hateful day when I received life!’
I exclaimed in agony. ‘Accursed creator! Why did you form
a monster so hideous that even you turned from me in disgust?
God, in pity, made man beautiful and alluring, after
his own image; but my form is a filthy type of yours, more
horrid even from the very resemblance. Satan had his companions,
fellow devils, to admire and encourage him, but I
am solitary and abhorred.’
‘These were the reflections of my hours of despondency
and solitude; but when I contemplated the virtues of the
cottagers, their amiable and benevolent dispositions, I persuaded
myself that when they should become acquainted
with my admiration of their virtues they would compassionate
me and overlook my personal deformity. Could they
turn from their door one, however monstrous, who solicited
their compassion and friendship? I resolved, at least, not to
despair, but in every way to fit myself for an interview with
them which would decide my fate. I postponed this attempt
for some months longer, for the importance attached to its
success inspired me with a dread lest I should fail. Besides,
I found that my understanding improved so much with every
day’s experience that I was unwilling to commence this
undertaking until a few more months should have added to
my sagacity.
‘Several changes, in the meantime, took place in the cottage.
The presence of Safie diffused happiness among its
inhabitants, and I also found that a greater degree of plenty 
156 Frankenstein
reigned there. Felix and Agatha spent more time in amusement
and conversation, and were assisted in their labours
by servants. They did not appear rich, but they were contented
and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful,
while mine became every day more tumultuous. Increase
of knowledge only discovered to me more clearly what a
wretched outcast I was. I cherished hope, it is true, but it
vanished when I beheld my person reflected in water or my
shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail image and that
inconstant shade.
‘I endeavoured to crush these fears and to fortify myself
for the trial which in a few months I resolved to undergo;
and sometimes I allowed my thoughts, unchecked by reason,
to ramble in the fields of Paradise, and dared to fancy
amiable and lovely creatures sympathizing with my feelings
and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances
breathed smiles of consolation. But it was all a dream; no
Eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was
alone. I remembered Adam’s supplication to his Creator.
But where was mine? He had abandoned me, and in the bitterness
of my heart I cursed him.
‘Autumn passed thus. I saw, with surprise and grief, the
leaves decay and fall, and nature again assume the barren
and bleak appearance it had worn when I first beheld the
woods and the lovely moon. Yet I did not heed the bleakness
of the weather; I was better fitted by my conformation
for the endurance of cold than heat. But my chief delights
were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay apparel
of summer; when those deserted me, I turned with 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 157
more attention towards the cottagers. Their happiness was
not decreased by the absence of summer. They loved and
sympathized with one another; and their joys, depending
on each other, were not interrupted by the casualties that
took place around them. The more I saw of them, the greater
became my desire to claim their protection and kindness;
my heart yearned to be known and loved by these amiable
creatures; to see their sweet looks directed towards me with
affection was the utmost limit of my ambition. I dared not
think that they would turn them from me with disdain and
horror. The poor that stopped at their door were never driven
away. I asked, it is true, for greater treasures than a little
food or rest: I required kindness and sympathy; but I did
not believe myself utterly unworthy of it.
‘The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the
seasons had taken place since I awoke into life. My attention
at this time was solely directed towards my plan of
introducing myself into the cottage of my protectors. I revolved
many projects, but that on which I finally fixed was
to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be
alone. I had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural
hideousness of my person was the chief object of horror
with those who had formerly beheld me. My voice, although
harsh, had nothing terrible in it; I thought, therefore, that
if in the absence of his children I could gain the good will
and mediation of the old De Lacey, I might by his means be
tolerated by my younger protectors.
‘One day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that
strewed the ground and diffused cheerfulness, although it 
158 Frankenstein
denied warmth, Safie, Agatha, and Felix departed on a long
country walk, and the old man, at his own desire, was left
alone in the cottage. When his children had departed, he
took up his guitar and played several mournful but sweet
airs, more sweet and mournful than I had ever heard him
play before. At first his countenance was illuminated with
pleasure, but as he continued, thoughtfulness and sadness
succeeded; at length, laying aside the instrument, he sat absorbed
in reflection.
‘My heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of
trial, which would decide my hopes or realize my fears. The
servants were gone to a neighbouring fair. All was silent in
and around the cottage; it was an excellent opportunity; yet,
when I proceeded to execute my plan, my limbs failed me
and I sank to the ground. Again I rose, and exerting all the
firmness of which I was master, removed the planks which
I had placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat. The
fresh air revived me, and with renewed determination I approached
the door of their cottage.
‘I knocked. ‘Who is there?’ said the old man. ‘Come in.’
‘I entered. ‘Pardon this intrusion,’ said I; ‘I am a traveller
in want of a little rest; you would greatly oblige me if you
would allow me to remain a few minutes before the fire.’
‘‘Enter,’ said De Lacey, ‘and I will try in what manner I
can to relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children
are from home, and as I am blind, I am afraid I shall find it
difficult to procure food for you.’
‘‘Do not trouble yourself, my kind host; I have food; it is
warmth and rest only that I need.’
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 159
‘I sat down, and a silence ensued. I knew that every minute
was precious to me, yet I remained irresolute in what
manner to commence the interview, when the old man addressed
me. ‘By your language, stranger, I suppose you are
my countryman; are you French?’
‘‘No; but I was educated by a French family and understand
that language only. I am now going to claim the
protection of some friends, whom I sincerely love, and of
whose favour I have some hopes.’
‘‘Are they Germans?’
‘‘No, they are French. But let us change the subject. I am
an unfortunate and deserted creature, I look around and I
have no relation or friend upon earth. These amiable people
to whom I go have never seen me and know little of me. I
am full of fears, for if I fail there, I am an outcast in the
world forever.’
‘‘Do not despair. To be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate,
but the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any
obvious self-interest, are full of brotherly love and charity.
Rely, therefore, on your hopes; and if these friends are good
and amiable, do not despair.’
‘‘They are kind—they are the most excellent creatures in
the world; but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against
me. I have good dispositions; my life has been hitherto
harmless and in some degree beneficial; but a fatal prejudice
clouds their eyes, and where they ought to see a feeling
and kind friend, they behold only a detestable monster.’
‘‘That is indeed unfortunate; but if you are really blameless,
cannot you undeceive them?’
160 Frankenstein
‘‘I am about to undertake that task; and it is on that account
that I feel so many overwhelming terrors. I tenderly
love these friends; I have, unknown to them, been for many
months in the habits of daily kindness towards them; but
they believe that I wish to injure them, and it is that prejudice
which I wish to overcome.’
‘‘Where do these friends reside?’
‘‘Near this spot.’
‘The old man paused and then continued, ‘If you will
unreservedly confide to me the particulars of your tale, I
perhaps may be of use in undeceiving them. I am blind and
cannot judge of your countenance, but there is something
in your words which persuades me that you are sincere. I
am poor and an exile, but it will afford me true pleasure to
be in any way serviceable to a human creature.’
‘‘Excellent man! I thank you and accept your generous
offer. You raise me from the dust by this kindness; and I
trust that, by your aid, I shall not be driven from the society
and sympathy of your fellow creatures.’
‘‘Heaven forbid! Even if you were really criminal, for that
can only drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to
virtue. I also am unfortunate; I and my family have been
condemned, although innocent; judge, therefore, if I do not
feel for your misfortunes.’
‘‘How can I thank you, my best and only benefactor?
From your lips first have I heard the voice of kindness directed
towards me; I shall be forever grateful; and your
present humanity assures me of success with those friends
whom I am on the point of meeting.’
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 161
‘‘May I know the names and residence of those friends?’ ‘I
paused. This, I thought, was the moment of decision, which
was to rob me of or bestow happiness on me forever. I struggled
vainly for firmness sufficient to answer him, but the
effort destroyed all my remaining strength; I sank on the
chair and sobbed aloud. At that moment I heard the steps of
my younger protectors. I had not a moment to lose, but seizing
the hand of the old man, I cried, ‘Now is the time! Save
and protect me! You and your family are the friends whom
I seek. Do not you desert me in the hour of trial!’
‘‘Great God!’ exclaimed the old man. ‘Who are you?’
‘At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix,
Safie, and Agatha entered. Who can describe their horror
and consternation on beholding me? Agatha fainted, and
Safie, unable to attend to her friend, rushed out of the cottage.
Felix darted forward, and with supernatural force tore
me from his father, to whose knees I clung, in a transport of
fury, he dashed me to the ground and struck me violently
with a stick. I could have torn him limb from limb, as the
lion rends the antelope. But my heart sank within me as
with bitter sickness, and I refrained. I saw him on the point
of repeating his blow, when, overcome by pain and anguish,
I quitted the cottage, and in the general tumult escaped unperceived
to my hovel.’
162 Frankenstein
Chapter 16
‘Cursed, cursed creator! Why did I live? Why, in that instant,
did I not extinguish the spark of existence which
you had so wantonly bestowed? I know not; despair had not
yet taken possession of me; my feelings were those of rage
and revenge. I could with pleasure have destroyed the cottage
and its inhabitants and have glutted myself with their
shrieks and misery.
‘When night came I quitted my retreat and wandered
in the wood; and now, no longer restrained by the fear of
discovery, I gave vent to my anguish in fearful howlings.
I was like a wild beast that had broken the toils, destroying
the objects that obstructed me and ranging through
the wood with a staglike swiftness. Oh! What a miserable
night I passed! The cold stars shone in mockery, and the
bare trees waved their branches above me; now and then
the sweet voice of a bird burst forth amidst the universal
stillness. All, save I, were at rest or in enjoyment; I, like the
arch-fiend, bore a hell within me, and finding myself unsympathized
with, wished to tear up the trees, spread havoc
and destruction around me, and then to have sat down and
enjoyed the ruin.
‘But this was a luxury of sensation that could not endure;
I became fatigued with excess of bodily exertion and
sank on the damp grass in the sick impotence of despair. 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 163
There was none among the myriads of men that existed who
would pity or assist me; and should I feel kindness towards
my enemies? No; from that moment I declared everlasting
war against the species, and more than all, against him who
had formed me and sent me forth to this insupportable misery.
‘The sun rose; I heard the voices of men and knew that
it was impossible to return to my retreat during that day.
Accordingly I hid myself in some thick underwood, determining
to devote the ensuing hours to reflection on my
situation.
‘The pleasant sunshine and the pure air of day restored
me to some degree of tranquillity; and when I considered
what had passed at the cottage, I could not help believing
that I had been too hasty in my conclusions. I had certainly
acted imprudently. It was apparent that my conversation
had interested the father in my behalf, and I was a fool in
having exposed my person to the horror of his children. I
ought to have familiarized the old De Lacey to me, and by
degrees to have discovered myself to the rest of his family,
when they should have been prepared for my approach.
But I did not believe my errors to be irretrievable, and after
much consideration I resolved to return to the cottage,
seek the old man, and by my representations win him to
my party.
‘These thoughts calmed me, and in the afternoon I sank
into a profound sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow
me to be visited by peaceful dreams. The horrible scene
of the preceding day was forever acting before my eyes; the 
164 Frankenstein
females were flying and the enraged Felix tearing me from
his father’s feet. I awoke exhausted, and finding that it was
already night, I crept forth from my hiding-place, and went
in search of food.
‘When my hunger was appeased, I directed my steps towards
the well-known path that conducted to the cottage.
All there was at peace. I crept into my hovel and remained
in silent expectation of the accustomed hour when the family
arose. That hour passed, the sun mounted high in the
heavens, but the cottagers did not appear. I trembled violently,
apprehending some dreadful misfortune. The inside
of the cottage was dark, and I heard no motion; I cannot
describe the agony of this suspense.
‘Presently two countrymen passed by, but pausing near
the cottage, they entered into conversation, using violent
gesticulations; but I did not understand what they said, as
they spoke the language of the country, which differed from
that of my protectors. Soon after, however, Felix approached
with another man; I was surprised, as I knew that he had
not quitted the cottage that morning, and waited anxiously
to discover from his discourse the meaning of these unusual
appearances.
‘‘Do you consider,’ said his companion to him, ‘that you
will be obliged to pay three months’ rent and to lose the
produce of your garden? I do not wish to take any unfair
advantage, and I beg therefore that you will take some days
to consider of your determination.’
‘‘It is utterly useless,’ replied Felix; ‘we can never again
inhabit your cottage. The life of my father is in the greatest 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 165
danger, owing to the dreadful circumstance that I have related.
My wife and my sister will never recover from their
horror. I entreat you not to reason with me any more. Take
possession of your tenement and let me fly from this place.’
‘Felix trembled violently as he said this. He and his companion
entered the cottage, in which they remained for a
few minutes, and then departed. I never saw any of the family
of De Lacey more.
‘I continued for the remainder of the day in my hovel in a
state of utter and stupid despair. My protectors had departed
and had broken the only link that held me to the world.
For the first time the feelings of revenge and hatred filled
my bosom, and I did not strive to control them, but allowing
myself to be borne away by the stream, I bent my mind
towards injury and death. When I thought of my friends, of
the mild voice of De Lacey, the gentle eyes of Agatha, and
the exquisite beauty of the Arabian, these thoughts vanished
and a gush of tears somewhat soothed me. But again
when I reflected that they had spurned and deserted me, anger
returned, a rage of anger, and unable to injure anything
human, I turned my fury towards inanimate objects. As
night advanced I placed a variety of combustibles around
the cottage, and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation
in the garden, I waited with forced impatience until
the moon had sunk to commence my operations.
‘As the night advanced, a fierce wind arose from the
woods and quickly dispersed the clouds that had loitered
in the heavens; the blast tore along like a mighty avalanche
and produced a kind of insanity in my spirits that burst all 
166 Frankenstein
bounds of reason and reflection. I lighted the dry branch
of a tree and danced with fury around the devoted cottage,
my eyes still fixed on the western horizon, the edge of which
the moon nearly touched. A part of its orb was at length hid,
and I waved my brand; it sank, and with a loud scream I
fired the straw, and heath, and bushes, which I had collected.
The wind fanned the fire, and the cottage was quickly
enveloped by the flames, which clung to it and licked it with
their forked and destroying tongues.
‘As soon as I was convinced that no assistance could save
any part of the habitation, I quitted the scene and sought for
refuge in the woods.
‘And now, with the world before me, whither should I
bend my steps? I resolved to fly far from the scene of my
misfortunes; but to me, hated and despised, every country
must be equally horrible. At length the thought of you
crossed my mind. I learned from your papers that you were
my father, my creator; and to whom could I apply with
more fitness than to him who had given me life? Among
the lessons that Felix had bestowed upon Safie, geography
had not been omitted; I had learned from these the relative
situations of the different countries of the earth. You had
mentioned Geneva as the name of your native town, and
towards this place I resolved to proceed.
‘But how was I to direct myself? I knew that I must travel
in a southwesterly direction to reach my destination, but
the sun was my only guide. I did not know the names of the
towns that I was to pass through, nor could I ask information
from a single human being; but I did not despair. From 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 167
you only could I hope for succour, although towards you
I felt no sentiment but that of hatred. Unfeeling, heartless
creator! You had endowed me with perceptions and passions
and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and
horror of mankind. But on you only had I any claim for pity
and redress, and from you I determined to seek that justice
which I vainly attempted to gain from any other being that
wore the human form.
‘My travels were long and the sufferings I endured intense.
It was late in autumn when I quitted the district where I had
so long resided. I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering
the visage of a human being. Nature decayed around
me, and the sun became heatless; rain and snow poured
around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface of the
earth was hard and chill, and bare, and I found no shelter.
Oh, earth! How often did I imprecate curses on the cause
of my being! The mildness of my nature had fled, and all
within me was turned to gall and bitterness. The nearer I approached
to your habitation, the more deeply did I feel the
spirit of revenge enkindled in my heart. Snow fell, and the
waters were hardened, but I rested not. A few incidents now
and then directed me, and I possessed a map of the country;
but I often wandered wide from my path. The agony of my
feelings allowed me no respite; no incident occurred from
which my rage and misery could not extract its food; but a
circumstance that happened when I arrived on the confines
of Switzerland, when the sun had recovered its warmth and
the earth again began to look green, confirmed in an especial
manner the bitterness and horror of my feelings.
168 Frankenstein
‘I generally rested during the day and travelled only when
I was secured by night from the view of man. One morning,
however, finding that my path lay through a deep wood, I
ventured to continue my journey after the sun had risen;
the day, which was one of the first of spring, cheered even
me by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balminess of
the air. I felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had
long appeared dead, revive within me. Half surprised by
the novelty of these sensations, I allowed myself to be borne
away by them, and forgetting my solitude and deformity,
dared to be happy. Soft tears again bedewed my cheeks, and
I even raised my humid eyes with thankfulness towards the
blessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me.
‘I continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until I
came to its boundary, which was skirted by a deep and rapid
river, into which many of the trees bent their branches, now
budding with the fresh spring. Here I paused, not exactly
knowing what path to pursue, when I heard the sound of
voices, that induced me to conceal myself under the shade
of a cypress. I was scarcely hid when a young girl came running
towards the spot where I was concealed, laughing, as
if she ran from someone in sport. She continued her course
along the precipitous sides of the river, when suddenly her
foot slipped, and she fell into the rapid stream. I rushed
from my hiding-place and with extreme labour, from the
force of the current, saved her and dragged her to shore.
She was senseless, and I endeavoured by every means in my
power to restore animation, when I was suddenly interrupted
by the approach of a rustic, who was probably the person 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 169
from whom she had playfully fled. On seeing me, he darted
towards me, and tearing the girl from my arms, hastened
towards the deeper parts of the wood. I followed speedily, I
hardly knew why; but when the man saw me draw near, he
aimed a gun, which he carried, at my body and fired. I sank
to the ground, and my injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped
into the wood.
‘This was then the reward of my benevolence! I had saved
a human being from destruction, and as a recompense I
now writhed under the miserable pain of a wound which
shattered the flesh and bone. The feelings of kindness and
gentleness which I had entertained but a few moments
before gave place to hellish rage and gnashing of teeth. Inflamed
by pain, I vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to
all mankind. But the agony of my wound overcame me; my
pulses paused, and I fainted.
‘For some weeks I led a miserable life in the woods, endeavouring
to cure the wound which I had received. The
ball had entered my shoulder, and I knew not whether it
had remained there or passed through; at any rate I had no
means of extracting it. My sufferings were augmented also
by the oppressive sense of the injustice and ingratitude of
their infliction. My daily vows rose for revenge— a deep
and deadly revenge, such as would alone compensate for
the outrages and anguish I had endured.
‘After some weeks my wound healed, and I continued my
journey. The labours I endured were no longer to be alleviated
by the bright sun or gentle breezes of spring; all joy was
but a mockery which insulted my desolate state and made 
170 Frankenstein
me feel more painfully that I was not made for the enjoyment
of pleasure.
‘But my toils now drew near a close, and in two months
from this time I reached the environs of Geneva.
‘It was evening when I arrived, and I retired to a hidingplace
among the fields that surround it to meditate in what
manner I should apply to you. I was oppressed by fatigue
and hunger and far too unhappy to enjoy the gentle breezes
of evening or the prospect of the sun setting behind the stupendous
mountains of Jura.
‘At this time a slight sleep relieved me from the pain of
reflection, which was disturbed by the approach of a beautiful
child, who came running into the recess I had chosen,
with all the sportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as I gazed
on him, an idea seized me that this little creature was unprejudiced
and had lived too short a time to have imbibed
a horror of deformity. If, therefore, I could seize him and
educate him as my companion and friend, I should not be
so desolate in this peopled earth.
‘Urged by this impulse, I seized on the boy as he passed
and drew him towards me. As soon as he beheld my form,
he placed his hands before his eyes and uttered a shrill
scream; I drew his hand forcibly from his face and said,
‘Child, what is the meaning of this? I do not intend to hurt
you; listen to me.’
‘He struggled violently. ‘Let me go,’ he cried; ‘monster!
Ugly wretch! You wish to eat me and tear me to pieces. You
are an ogre. Let me go, or I will tell my papa.’
‘‘Boy, you will never see your father again; you must 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 171
come with me.’
‘‘Hideous monster! Let me go. My papa is a Syndic— he
is M. Frankenstein—he will punish you. You dare not keep
me.’
‘‘Frankenstein! you belong then to my enemy—to him
towards whom I have sworn eternal revenge; you shall be
my first victim.’
‘The child still struggled and loaded me with epithets
which carried despair to my heart; I grasped his throat to
silence him, and in a moment he lay dead at my feet.
‘I gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation
and hellish triumph; clapping my hands, I exclaimed,
‘I too can create desolation; my enemy is not invulnerable;
this death will carry despair to him, and a thousand other
miseries shall torment and destroy him.’
‘As I fixed my eyes on the child, I saw something glittering
on his breast. I took it; it was a portrait of a most
lovely woman. In spite of my malignity, it softened and attracted
me. For a few moments I gazed with delight on her
dark eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her lovely lips; but
presently my rage returned; I remembered that I was forever
deprived of the delights that such beautiful creatures
could bestow and that she whose resemblance I contemplated
would, in regarding me, have changed that air of divine
benignity to one expressive of disgust and affright.
‘Can you wonder that such thoughts transported me
with rage? I only wonder that at that moment, instead of
venting my sensations in exclamations and agony, I did not
rush among mankind and perish in the attempt to destroy 
172 Frankenstein
them.
‘While l was overcome by these feelings, I left the spot
where I had committed the murder, and seeking a more secluded
hiding-place, I entered a barn which had appeared
to me to be empty. A woman was sleeping on some straw;
she was young, not indeed so beautiful as her whose portrait
I held, but of an agreeable aspect and blooming in the
loveliness of youth and health. Here, I thought, is one of
those whose joy-imparting smiles are bestowed on all but
me. And then I bent over her and whispered, ‘Awake, fairest,
thy lover is near—he who would give his life but to obtain
one look of affection from thine eyes; my beloved, awake!’
‘The sleeper stirred; a thrill of terror ran through me.
Should she indeed awake, and see me, and curse me, and
denounce the murderer? Thus would she assuredly act if her
darkened eyes opened and she beheld me. The thought was
madness; it stirred the fiend within me—not I, but she, shall
suffer; the murder I have committed because I am forever
robbed of all that she could give me, she shall atone. The
crime had its source in her; be hers the punishment! Thanks
to the lessons of Felix and the sanguinary laws of man, I had
learned now to work mischief. I bent over her and placed
the portrait securely in one of the folds of her dress. She
moved again, and I fled.
‘For some days I haunted the spot where these scenes had
taken place, sometimes wishing to see you, sometimes resolved
to quit the world and its miseries forever. At length
I wandered towards these mountains, and have ranged
through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 173
passion which you alone can gratify. We may not part until
you have promised to comply with my requisition. I am
alone and miserable; man will not associate with me; but
one as deformed and horrible as myself would not deny herself
to me. My companion must be of the same species and
have the same defects. This being you must create.’
174 Frankenstein
Chapter 17
The being finished speaking and fixed his looks upon
me in the expectation of a reply. But I was bewildered,
perplexed, and unable to arrange my ideas sufficiently to
understand the full extent of his proposition. He continued,
‘You must create a female for me with whom I can live in
the interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being.
This you alone can do, and I demand it of you as a right
which you must not refuse to concede.’
The latter part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger
that had died away while he narrated his peaceful life
among the cottagers, and as he said this I could no longer
suppress the rage that burned within me.
‘I do refuse it,’ I replied; ‘and no torture shall ever extort
a consent from me. You may render me the most miserable
of men, but you shall never make me base in my own eyes.
Shall I create another like yourself, whose joint wickedness
might desolate the world. Begone! I have answered you; you
may torture me, but I will never consent.’
‘You are in the wrong,’ replied the fiend; ‘and instead of
threatening, I am content to reason with you. I am malicious
because I am miserable. Am I not shunned and hated
by all mankind? You, my creator, would tear me to pieces
and triumph; remember that, and tell me why I should pity 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 175
man more than he pities me? You would not call it murder
if you could precipitate me into one of those ice-rifts and
destroy my frame, the work of your own hands. Shall I respect
man when he condemns me? Let him live with me in
the interchange of kindness, and instead of injury I would
bestow every benefit upon him with tears of gratitude at
his acceptance. But that cannot be; the human senses are
insurmountable barriers to our union. Yet mine shall not
be the submission of abject slavery. I will revenge my injuries;
if I cannot inspire love, I will cause fear, and chiefly
towards you my archenemy, because my creator, do I swear
inextinguishable hatred. Have a care; I will work at your destruction,
nor finish until I desolate your heart, so that you
shall curse the hour of your birth.’
A fiendish rage animated him as he said this; his face was
wrinkled into contortions too horrible for human eyes to
behold; but presently he calmed himself and proceeded‘I
intended to reason. This passion is detrimental to me,
for you do not reflect that you are the cause of its excess.
If any being felt emotions of benevolence towards me, I
should return them a hundred and a hundredfold; for that
one creature’s sake I would make peace with the whole
kind! But I now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be
realized. What I ask of you is reasonable and moderate; I
demand a creature of another sex, but as hideous as myself;
the gratification is small, but it is all that I can receive, and
it shall content me. It is true, we shall be monsters, cut off
from all the world; but on that account we shall be more attached
to one another. Our lives will not be happy, but they 
176 Frankenstein
will be harmless and free from the misery I now feel. Oh!
My creator, make me happy; let me feel gratitude towards
you for one benefit! Let me see that I excite the sympathy of
some existing thing; do not deny me my request!’
I was moved. I shuddered when I thought of the possible
consequences of my consent, but I felt that there was some
justice in his argument. His tale and the feelings he now expressed
proved him to be a creature of fine sensations, and
did I not as his maker owe him all the portion of happiness
that it was in my power to bestow? He saw my change of
feeling and continued,
‘If you consent, neither you nor any other human being
shall ever see us again; I will go to the vast wilds of South
America. My food is not that of man; I do not destroy the
lamb and the kid to glut my appetite; acorns and berries
afford me sufficient nourishment. My companion will be
of the same nature as myself and will be content with the
same fare. We shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun
will shine on us as on man and will ripen our food. The picture
I present to you is peaceful and human, and you must
feel that you could deny it only in the wantonness of power
and cruelty. Pitiless as you have been towards me, I now
see compassion in your eyes; let me seize the favourable
moment and persuade you to promise what I so ardently
desire.’
‘You propose,’ replied I, ‘to fly from the habitations of
man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field
will be your only companions. How can you, who long for
the love and sympathy of man, persevere in this exile? You 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 177
will return and again seek their kindness, and you will meet
with their detestation; your evil passions will be renewed,
and you will then have a companion to aid you in the task
of destruction. This may not be; cease to argue the point, for
I cannot consent.’
‘How inconstant are your feelings! But a moment ago you
were moved by my representations, and why do you again
harden yourself to my complaints? I swear to you, by the
earth which I inhabit, and by you that made me, that with
the companion you bestow I will quit the neighbourhood
of man and dwell, as it may chance, in the most savage of
places. My evil passions will have fled, for I shall meet with
sympathy! My life will flow quietly away, and in my dying
moments I shall not curse my maker.’
His words had a strange effect upon me. I compassionated
him and sometimes felt a wish to console him, but when
I looked upon him, when I saw the filthy mass that moved
and talked, my heart sickened and my feelings were altered
to those of horror and hatred. I tried to stifle these sensations;
I thought that as I could not sympathize with him,
I had no right to withhold from him the small portion of
happiness which was yet in my power to bestow.
‘You swear,’ I said, ‘to be harmless; but have you not already
shown a degree of malice that should reasonably
make me distrust you? May not even this be a feint that will
increase your triumph by affording a wider scope for your
revenge?’
‘How is this? I must not be trifled with, and I demand an
answer. If I have no ties and no affections, hatred and vice 
178 Frankenstein
must be my portion; the love of another will destroy the
cause of my crimes, and I shall become a thing of whose
existence everyone will be ignorant. My vices are the children
of a forced solitude that I abhor, and my virtues will
necessarily arise when I live in communion with an equal.
I shall feel the affections of a sensitive being and became
linked to the chain of existence and events from which I am
now excluded.’
I paused some time to reflect on all he had related and
the various arguments which he had employed. I thought of
the promise of virtues which he had displayed on the opening
of his existence and the subsequent blight of all kindly
feeling by the loathing and scorn which his protectors had
manifested towards him. His power and threats were not
omitted in my calculations; a creature who could exist in
the ice caves of the glaciers and hide himself from pursuit
among the ridges of inaccessible precipices was a being possessing
faculties it would be vain to cope with. After a long
pause of reflection I concluded that the justice due both to
him and my fellow creatures demanded of me that I should
comply with his request. Turning to him, therefore, I said,
‘I consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit
Europe forever, and every other place in the neighbourhood
of man, as soon as I shall deliver into your hands a female
who will accompany you in your exile.’
‘I swear,’ he cried, ‘by the sun, and by the blue sky of heaven,
and by the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you
grant my prayer, while they exist you shall never behold me
again. Depart to your home and commence your labours; 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 179
I shall watch their progress with unutterable anxiety; and
fear not but that when you are ready I shall appear.’
Saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of
any change in my sentiments. I saw him descend the mountain
with greater speed than the flight of an eagle, and
quickly lost among the undulations of the sea of ice.
His tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun was
upon the verge of the horizon when he departed. I knew
that I ought to hasten my descent towards the valley, as I
should soon be encompassed in darkness; but my heart was
heavy, and my steps slow. The labour of winding among the
little paths of the mountain and fixing my feet firmly as I
advanced perplexed me, occupied as I was by the emotions
which the occurrences of the day had produced. Night was
far advanced when I came to the halfway resting-place and
seated myself beside the fountain. The stars shone at intervals
as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines
rose before me, and every here and there a broken tree lay
on the ground; it was a scene of wonderful solemnity and
stirred strange thoughts within me. I wept bitterly, and
clasping my hands in agony, I exclaimed, ‘Oh! Stars and
clouds and winds, ye are all about to mock me; if ye really
pity me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as
nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave me in darkness.’
These were wild and miserable thoughts, but I cannot describe
to you how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed
upon me and how I listened to every blast of wind as if it
were a dull ugly siroc on its way to consume me.
180 Frankenstein
Morning dawned before I arrived at the village of Chamounix;
I took no rest, but returned immediately to Geneva.
Even in my own heart I could give no expression to my sensations—they
weighed on me with a mountain’s weight and
their excess destroyed my agony beneath them. Thus I returned
home, and entering the house, presented myself to
the family. My haggard and wild appearance awoke intense
alarm, but I answered no question, scarcely did I speak. I felt
as if I were placed under a ban—as if I had no right to claim
their sympathies— as if never more might I enjoy companionship
with them. Yet even thus I loved them to adoration;
and to save them, I resolved to dedicate myself to my most
abhorred task. The prospect of such an occupation made
every other circumstance of existence pass before me like a
dream, and that thought only had to me the reality of life.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 181
Chapter 18
Day after day, week after week, passed away on my return
to Geneva; and I could not collect the courage to
recommence my work. I feared the vengeance of the disappointed
fiend, yet I was unable to overcome my repugnance
to the task which was enjoined me. I found that I could not
compose a female without again devoting several months
to profound study and laborious disquisition. I had heard of
some discoveries having been made by an English philosopher,
the knowledge of which was material to my success,
and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father’s consent
to visit England for this purpose; but I clung to every pretence
of delay and shrank from taking the first step in an
undertaking whose immediate necessity began to appear
less absolute to me. A change indeed had taken place in me;
my health, which had hitherto declined, was now much restored;
and my spirits, when unchecked by the memory of
my unhappy promise, rose proportionably. My father saw
this change with pleasure, and he turned his thoughts towards
the best method of eradicating the remains of my
melancholy, which every now and then would return by fits,
and with a devouring blackness overcast the approaching
sunshine. At these moments I took refuge in the most perfect
solitude. I passed whole days on the lake alone in a little
boat, watching the clouds and listening to the rippling of 
182 Frankenstein
the waves, silent and listless. But the fresh air and bright
sun seldom failed to restore me to some degree of composure,
and on my return I met the salutations of my friends
with a readier smile and a more cheerful heart.
It was after my return from one of these rambles that my
father, calling me aside, thus addressed me,
‘I am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resumed
your former pleasures and seem to be returning to
yourself. And yet you are still unhappy and still avoid our
society. For some time I was lost in conjecture as to the
cause of this, but yesterday an idea struck me, and if it is
well founded, I conjure you to avow it. Reserve on such a
point would be not only useless, but draw down treble misery
on us all.’
I trembled violently at his exordium, and my father
continued— ‘I confess, my son, that I have always looked
forward to your marriage with our dear Elizabeth as the
tie of our domestic comfort and the stay of my declining
years. You were attached to each other from your earliest
infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions
and tastes, entirely suited to one another. But so blind
is the experience of man that what I conceived to be the
best assistants to my plan may have entirely destroyed it.
You, perhaps, regard her as your sister, without any wish
that she might become your wife. Nay, you may have met
with another whom you may love; and considering yourself
as bound in honour to Elizabeth, this struggle may occasion
the poignant misery which you appear to feel.’
‘My dear father, reassure yourself. I love my cousin ten-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 183
derly and sincerely. I never saw any woman who excited, as
Elizabeth does, my warmest admiration and affection. My
future hopes and prospects are entirely bound up in the expectation
of our union.’
‘The expression of your sentiments of this subject, my
dear Victor, gives me more pleasure than I have for some
time experienced. If you feel thus, we shall assuredly be
happy, however present events may cast a gloom over us.
But it is this gloom which appears to have taken so strong
a hold of your mind that I wish to dissipate. Tell me, therefore,
whether you object to an immediate solemnization of
the marriage. We have been unfortunate, and recent events
have drawn us from that everyday tranquillity befitting my
years and infirmities. You are younger; yet l do not suppose,
possessed as you are of a competent fortune, that an early
marriage would at all interfere with any future plans of honour
and utility that you may have formed. Do not suppose,
however, that I wish to dictate happiness to you or that a
delay on your part would cause me any serious uneasiness.
Interpret my words with candour and answer me, I conjure
you, with confidence and sincerity.’
I listened to my father in silence and remained for some
time incapable of offering any reply. I revolved rapidly
in my mind a multitude of thoughts and endeavoured to
arrive at some conclusion. Alas! To me the idea of an immediate
union with my Elizabeth was one of horror and
dismay. I was bound by a solemn promise which I had not
yet fulfilled and dared not break, or if I did, what manifold
miseries might not impend over me and my devoted fam-
184 Frankenstein
ily! Could I enter into a festival with this deadly weight yet
hanging round my neck and bowing me to the ground? I
must perform my engagement and let the monster depart
with his mate before I allowed myself to enjoy the delight of
a union from which I expected peace.
I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of
either journeying to England or entering into a long correspondence
with those philosophers of that country whose
knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable use to me
in my present undertaking. The latter method of obtaining
the desired intelligence was dilatory and unsatisfactory;
besides, I had an insurmountable aversion to the idea of engaging
myself in my loathsome task in my father’s house
while in habits of familiar intercourse with those I loved.
I knew that a thousand fearful accidents might occur, the
slightest of which would disclose a tale to thrill all connected
with me with horror. I was aware also that I should often
lose all self-command, all capacity of hiding the harrowing
sensations that would possess me during the progress of my
unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved
while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly
be achieved, and I might be restored to my family in peace
and happiness. My promise fulfilled, the monster would depart
forever. Or (so my fond fancy imaged) some accident
might meanwhile occur to destroy him and put an end to
my slavery forever.
These feelings dictated my answer to my father. I expressed
a wish to visit England, but concealing the true
reasons of this request, I clothed my desires under a guise 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 185
which excited no suspicion, while I urged my desire with
an earnestness that easily induced my father to comply.
After so long a period of an absorbing melancholy that resembled
madness in its intensity and effects, he was glad
to find that I was capable of taking pleasure in the idea of
such a journey, and he hoped that change of scene and varied
amusement would, before my return, have restored me
entirely to myself.
The duration of my absence was left to my own choice; a
few months, or at most a year, was the period contemplated.
One paternal kind precaution he had taken to ensure
my having a companion. Without previously communicating
with me, he had, in concert with Elizabeth, arranged
that Clerval should join me at Strasbourg. This interfered
with the solitude I coveted for the prosecution of my task;
yet at the commencement of my journey the presence of
my friend could in no way be an impediment, and truly I
rejoiced that thus I should be saved many hours of lonely,
maddening reflection. Nay, Henry might stand between me
and the intrusion of my foe. If I were alone, would he not
at times force his abhorred presence on me to remind me of
my task or to contemplate its progress?
To England, therefore, I was bound, and it was understood
that my union with Elizabeth should take place
immediately on my return. My father’s age rendered him
extremely averse to delay. For myself, there was one reward
I promised myself from my detested toils— one consolation
for my unparalleled sufferings; it was the prospect of that
day when, enfranchised from my miserable slavery, I might 
186 Frankenstein
claim Elizabeth and forget the past in my union with her.
I now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling
haunted me which filled me with fear and agitation.
During my absence I should leave my friends unconscious
of the existence of their enemy and unprotected from his attacks,
exasperated as he might be by my departure. But he
had promised to follow me wherever I might go, and would
he not accompany me to England? This imagination was
dreadful in itself, but soothing inasmuch as it supposed the
safety of my friends. I was agonized with the idea of the possibility
that the reverse of this might happen. But through
the whole period during which I was the slave of my creature
I allowed myself to be governed by the impulses of the
moment; and my present sensations strongly intimated that
the fiend would follow me and exempt my family from the
danger of his machinations.
It was in the latter end of September that I again quitted
my native country. My journey had been my own suggestion,
and Elizabeth therefore acquiesced, but she was filled
with disquiet at the idea of my suffering, away from her, the
inroads of misery and grief. It had been her care which provided
me a companion in Clerval—and yet a man is blind to
a thousand minute circumstances which call forth a woman’s
sedulous attention. She longed to bid me hasten my
return; a thousand conflicting emotions rendered her mute
as she bade me a tearful, silent farewell.
I threw myself into the carriage that was to convey me
away, hardly knowing whither I was going, and careless of
what was passing around. I remembered only, and it was 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 187
with a bitter anguish that I reflected on it, to order that
my chemical instruments should be packed to go with me.
Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed through many
beautiful and majestic scenes, but my eyes were fixed and
unobserving. I could only think of the bourne of my travels
and the work which was to occupy me whilst they endured.
After some days spent in listless indolence, during which
I traversed many leagues, I arrived at Strasbourg, where I
waited two days for Clerval. He came. Alas, how great was
the contrast between us! He was alive to every new scene,
joyful when he saw the beauties of the setting sun, and more
happy when he beheld it rise and recommence a new day.
He pointed out to me the shifting colours of the landscape
and the appearances of the sky. ‘This is what it is to live,’
he cried; ‘how I enjoy existence! But you, my dear Frankenstein,
wherefore are you desponding and sorrowful!’ In
truth, I was occupied by gloomy thoughts and neither saw
the descent of the evening star nor the golden sunrise reflected
in the Rhine. And you, my friend, would be far more
amused with the journal of Clerval, who observed the scenery
with an eye of feeling and delight, than in listening to
my reflections. I, a miserable wretch, haunted by a curse
that shut up every avenue to enjoyment.
We had agreed to descend the Rhine in a boat from
Strasbourg to Rotterdam, whence we might take shipping
for London. During this voyage we passed many willowy
islands and saw several beautiful towns. We stayed a day at
Mannheim, and on the fifth from our departure from Strasbourg,
arrived at Mainz. The course of the Rhine below 
188 Frankenstein
Mainz becomes much more picturesque. The river descends
rapidly and winds between hills, not high, but steep, and of
beautiful forms. We saw many ruined castles standing on
the edges of precipices, surrounded by black woods, high
and inaccessible. This part of the Rhine, indeed, presents a
singularly variegated landscape. In one spot you view rugged
hills, ruined castles overlooking tremendous precipices,
with the dark Rhine rushing beneath; and on the sudden
turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards with green
sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns
occupy the scene.
We travelled at the time of the vintage and heard the
song of the labourers as we glided down the stream. Even
I, depressed in mind, and my spirits continually agitated by
gloomy feelings, even I was pleased. I lay at the bottom of
the boat, and as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed
to drink in a tranquillity to which I had long been a stranger.
And if these were my sensations, who can describe those
of Henry? He felt as if he had been transported to fairy-land
and enjoyed a happiness seldom tasted by man. ‘I have seen,’
he said, ‘the most beautiful scenes of my own country; I
have visited the lakes of Lucerne and Uri, where the snowy
mountains descend almost perpendicularly to the water,
casting black and impenetrable shades, which would cause
a gloomy and mournful appearance were it not for the most
verdant islands that relieve the eye by their gay appearance;
I have seen this lake agitated by a tempest, when the wind
tore up whirlwinds of water and gave you an idea of what the
water-spout must be on the great ocean; and the waves dash 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 189
with fury the base of the mountain, where the priest and
his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche and where
their dying voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses
of the nightly wind; I have seen the mountains of La Valais,
and the Pays de Vaud; but this country, Victor, pleases me
more than all those wonders. The mountains of Switzerland
are more majestic and strange, but there is a charm in the
banks of this divine river that I never before saw equalled.
Look at that castle which overhangs yon precipice; and that
also on the island, almost concealed amongst the foliage of
those lovely trees; and now that group of labourers coming
from among their vines; and that village half hid in the recess
of the mountain. Oh, surely the spirit that inhabits and
guards this place has a soul more in harmony with man
than those who pile the glacier or retire to the inaccessible
peaks of the mountains of our own country.’ Clerval! Beloved
friend! Even now it delights me to record your words
and to dwell on the praise of which you are so eminently
deserving. He was a being formed in the ‘very poetry of nature.’
His wild and enthusiastic imagination was chastened
by the sensibility of his heart. His soul overflowed with ardent
affections, and his friendship was of that devoted and
wondrous nature that the world-minded teach us to look
for only in the imagination. But even human sympathies
were not sufficient to satisfy his eager mind. The scenery of
external nature, which others regard only with admiration,
he loved with ardour:—
——-The sounding cataract 
190 Frankenstein
Haunted him like a passion: the tall rock,
The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
Their colours and their forms, were then to him
An appetite; a feeling, and a love,
That had no need of a remoter charm,
By thought supplied, or any interest
Unborrow’d from the eye.*
[*Wordsworth’s ‘Tintern Abbey”.]
And where does he now exist? Is this gentle and lovely
being lost forever? Has this mind, so replete with ideas,
imaginations fanciful and magnificent, which formed a
world, whose existence depended on the life of its creator;
— has this mind perished? Does it now only exist in my
memory? No, it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought,
and beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still
visits and consoles your unhappy friend.
Pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are
but a slight tribute to the unexampled worth of Henry, but
they soothe my heart, overflowing with the anguish which
his remembrance creates. I will proceed with my tale.
Beyond Cologne we descended to the plains of Holland;
and we resolved to post the remainder of our way, for the
wind was contrary and the stream of the river was too gentle
to aid us. Our journey here lost the interest arising from
beautiful scenery, but we arrived in a few days at Rotterdam,
whence we proceeded by sea to England. It was on a
clear morning, in the latter days of December, that I first 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 191
saw the white cliffs of Britain. The banks of the Thames presented
a new scene; they were flat but fertile, and almost
every town was marked by the remembrance of some story.
We saw Tilbury Fort and remembered the Spanish Armada,
Gravesend, Woolwich, and Greenwich— places which I had
heard of even in my country.
At length we saw the numerous steeples of London, St.
Paul’s towering above all, and the Tower famed in English
history.
192 Frankenstein
Chapter 19
London was our present point of rest; we determined to
remain several months in this wonderful and celebrated
city. Clerval desired the intercourse of the men of genius
and talent who flourished at this time, but this was with
me a secondary object; I was principally occupied with
the means of obtaining the information necessary for the
completion of my promise and quickly availed myself of
the letters of introduction that I had brought with me, addressed
to the most distinguished natural philosophers.
If this journey had taken place during my days of study
and happiness, it would have afforded me inexpressible
pleasure. But a blight had come over my existence, and I
only visited these people for the sake of the information
they might give me on the subject in which my interest was
so terribly profound. Company was irksome to me; when
alone, I could fill my mind with the sights of heaven and
earth; the voice of Henry soothed me, and I could thus
cheat myself into a transitory peace. But busy, uninteresting,
joyous faces brought back despair to my heart. I saw an
insurmountable barrier placed between me and my fellow
men; this barrier was sealed with the blood of William and
Justine, and to reflect on the events connected with those
names filled my soul with anguish.
But in Clerval I saw the image of my former self; he was 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 193
inquisitive and anxious to gain experience and instruction.
The difference of manners which he observed was to him an
inexhaustible source of instruction and amusement. He was
also pursuing an object he had long had in view. His design
was to visit India, in the belief that he had in his knowledge
of its various languages, and in the views he had taken of
its society, the means of materially assisting the progress of
European colonization and trade. In Britain only could he
further the execution of his plan. He was forever busy, and
the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected
mind. I tried to conceal this as much as possible, that
I might not debar him from the pleasures natural to one
who was entering on a new scene of life, undisturbed by
any care or bitter recollection. I often refused to accompany
him, alleging another engagement, that I might remain
alone. I now also began to collect the materials necessary
for my new creation, and this was to me like the torture of
single drops of water continually falling on the head. Every
thought that was devoted to it was an extreme anguish, and
every word that I spoke in allusion to it caused my lips to
quiver, and my heart to palpitate.
After passing some months in London, we received a letter
from a person in Scotland who had formerly been our
visitor at Geneva. He mentioned the beauties of his native
country and asked us if those were not sufficient allurements
to induce us to prolong our journey as far north as
Perth, where he resided. Clerval eagerly desired to accept
this invitation, and I, although I abhorred society, wished
to view again mountains and streams and all the wondrous 
194 Frankenstein
works with which Nature adorns her chosen dwelling-places.
We had arrived in England at the beginning of October,
and it was now February. We accordingly determined to
commence our journey towards the north at the expiration
of another month. In this expedition we did not intend to
follow the great road to Edinburgh, but to visit Windsor,
Oxford, Matlock, and the Cumberland lakes, resolving to
arrive at the completion of this tour about the end of July.
I packed up my chemical instruments and the materials I
had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some obscure
nook in the northern highlands of Scotland.
We quitted London on the 27th of March and remained
a few days at Windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest. This
was a new scene to us mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the
quantity of game, and the herds of stately deer were all novelties
to us.
From thence we proceeded to Oxford. As we entered
this city our minds were filled with the remembrance of the
events that had been transacted there more than a century
and a half before. It was here that Charles I had collected
his forces. This city had remained faithful to him, after the
whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard
of Parliament and liberty. The memory of that unfortunate
king and his companions, the amiable Falkland, the
insolent Goring, his queen, and son, gave a peculiar interest
to every part of the city which they might be supposed
to have inhabited. The spirit of elder days found a dwelling
here, and we delighted to trace its footsteps. If these feelings
had not found an imaginary gratification, the appearance 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 195
of the city had yet in itself sufficient beauty to obtain our
admiration. The colleges are ancient and picturesque; the
streets are almost magnificent; and the lovely Isis, which
flows beside it through meadows of exquisite verdure, is
spread forth into a placid expanse of waters, which reflects
its majestic assemblage of towers, and spires, and domes,
embosomed among aged trees.
I enjoyed this scene, and yet my enjoyment was embittered
both by the memory of the past and the anticipation
of the future. I was formed for peaceful happiness. During
my youthful days discontent never visited my mind, and if
I was ever overcome by ennui, the sight of what is beautiful
in nature or the study of what is excellent and sublime
in the productions of man could always interest my heart
and communicate elasticity to my spirits. But I am a blasted
tree; the bolt has entered my soul; and I felt then that I
should survive to exhibit what I shall soon cease to be—a
miserable spectacle of wrecked humanity, pitiable to others
and intolerable to myself.
We passed a considerable period at Oxford, rambling
among its environs and endeavouring to identify every spot
which might relate to the most animating epoch of English
history. Our little voyages of discovery were often prolonged
by the successive objects that presented themselves. We visited
the tomb of the illustrious Hampden and the field on
which that patriot fell. For a moment my soul was elevated
from its debasing and miserable fears to contemplate the divine
ideas of liberty and self sacrifice of which these sights
were the monuments and the remembrancers. For an in-
196 Frankenstein
stant I dared to shake off my chains and look around me
with a free and lofty spirit, but the iron had eaten into my
flesh, and I sank again, trembling and hopeless, into my
miserable self.
We left Oxford with regret and proceeded to Matlock,
which was our next place of rest. The country in the neighbourhood
of this village resembled, to a greater degree, the
scenery of Switzerland; but everything is on a lower scale,
and the green hills want the crown of distant white Alps
which always attend on the piny mountains of my native
country. We visited the wondrous cave and the little cabinets
of natural history, where the curiosities are disposed in
the same manner as in the collections at Servox and Chamounix.
The latter name made me tremble when pronounced
by Henry, and I hastened to quit Matlock, with which that
terrible scene was thus associated.
From Derby, still journeying northwards, we passed two
months in Cumberland and Westmorland. I could now almost
fancy myself among the Swiss mountains. The little
patches of snow which yet lingered on the northern sides
of the mountains, the lakes, and the dashing of the rocky
streams were all familiar and dear sights to me. Here also
we made some acquaintances, who almost contrived to
cheat me into happiness. The delight of Clerval was proportionably
greater than mine; his mind expanded in the
company of men of talent, and he found in his own nature
greater capacities and resources than he could have imagined
himself to have possessed while he associated with
his inferiors. ‘I could pass my life here,’ said he to me; ‘and 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 197
among these mountains I should scarcely regret Switzerland
and the Rhine.’
But he found that a traveller’s life is one that includes
much pain amidst its enjoyments. His feelings are forever
on the stretch; and when he begins to sink into repose, he
finds himself obliged to quit that on which he rests in pleasure
for something new, which again engages his attention,
and which also he forsakes for other novelties.
We had scarcely visited the various lakes of Cumberland
and Westmorland and conceived an affection for some of
the inhabitants when the period of our appointment with
our Scotch friend approached, and we left them to travel
on. For my own part I was not sorry. I had now neglected
my promise for some time, and I feared the effects of the
daemon’s disappointment. He might remain in Switzerland
and wreak his vengeance on my relatives. This idea pursued
me and tormented me at every moment from which I
might otherwise have snatched repose and peace. I waited
for my letters with feverish impatience; if they were delayed
I was miserable and overcome by a thousand fears;
and when they arrived and I saw the superscription of Elizabeth
or my father, I hardly dared to read and ascertain my
fate. Sometimes I thought that the fiend followed me and
might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion.
When these thoughts possessed me, I would not quit
Henry for a moment, but followed him as his shadow, to
protect him from the fancied rage of his destroyer. I felt as
if I had committed some great crime, the consciousness of
which haunted me. I was guiltless, but I had indeed drawn 
198 Frankenstein
down a horrible curse upon my head, as mortal as that of
crime.
I visited Edinburgh with languid eyes and mind; and yet
that city might have interested the most unfortunate being.
Clerval did not like it so well as Oxford, for the antiquity
of the latter city was more pleasing to him. But the beauty
and regularity of the new town of Edinburgh, its romantic
castle and its environs, the most delightful in the world,
Arthur’s Seat, St. Bernard’s Well, and the Pentland Hills
compensated him for the change and filled him with cheerfulness
and admiration. But I was impatient to arrive at the
termination of my journey.
We left Edinburgh in a week, passing through Coupar, St.
Andrew’s, and along the banks of the Tay, to Perth, where
our friend expected us. But I was in no mood to laugh and
talk with strangers or enter into their feelings or plans with
the good humour expected from a guest; and accordingly
I told Clerval that I wished to make the tour of Scotland
alone. ‘Do you,’ said I, ‘enjoy yourself, and let this be our
rendezvous. I may be absent a month or two; but do not
interfere with my motions, I entreat you; leave me to peace
and solitude for a short time; and when I return, I hope it
will be with a lighter heart, more congenial to your own
temper.
Henry wished to dissuade me, but seeing me bent on this
plan, ceased to remonstrate. He entreated me to write often.
‘I had rather be with you,’ he said, ‘in your solitary rambles,
than with these Scotch people, whom I do not know; hasten,
then, my dear friend, to return, that I may again feel myself 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 199
somewhat at home, which I cannot do in your absence.’
Having parted from my friend, I determined to visit
some remote spot of Scotland and finish my work in solitude.
I did not doubt but that the monster followed me and
would discover himself to me when I should have finished,
that he might receive his companion. With this resolution
I traversed the northern highlands and fixed on one of the
remotest of the Orkneys as the scene of my labours. It was
a place fitted for such a work, being hardly more than a
rock whose high sides were continually beaten upon by the
waves. The soil was barren, scarcely affording pasture for a
few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its inhabitants, which
consisted of five persons, whose gaunt and scraggy limbs
gave tokens of their miserable fare. Vegetables and bread,
when they indulged in such luxuries, and even fresh water,
was to be procured from the mainland, which was about
five miles distant.
On the whole island there were but three miserable huts,
and one of these was vacant when I arrived. This I hired. It
contained but two rooms, and these exhibited all the squalidness
of the most miserable penury. The thatch had fallen
in, the walls were unplastered, and the door was off its hinges.
I ordered it to be repaired, bought some furniture, and
took possession, an incident which would doubtless have
occasioned some surprise had not all the senses of the cottagers
been benumbed by want and squalid poverty. As it
was, I lived ungazed at and unmolested, hardly thanked for
the pittance of food and clothes which I gave, so much does
suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations of men.
200 Frankenstein
In this retreat I devoted the morning to labour; but in the
evening, when the weather permitted, I walked on the stony
beach of the sea to listen to the waves as they roared and
dashed at my feet. It was a monotonous yet ever-changing
scene. I thought of Switzerland; it was far different from this
desolate and appalling landscape. Its hills are covered with
vines, and its cottages are scattered thickly in the plains. Its
fair lakes reflect a blue and gentle sky, and when troubled by
the winds, their tumult is but as the play of a lively infant
when compared to the roarings of the giant ocean.
In this manner I distributed my occupations when I first
arrived, but as I proceeded in my labour, it became every
day more horrible and irksome to me. Sometimes I could
not prevail on myself to enter my laboratory for several days,
and at other times I toiled day and night in order to complete
my work. It was, indeed, a filthy process in which I was
engaged. During my first experiment, a kind of enthusiastic
frenzy had blinded me to the horror of my employment; my
mind was intently fixed on the consummation of my labour,
and my eyes were shut to the horror of my proceedings. But
now I went to it in cold blood, and my heart often sickened
at the work of my hands.
Thus situated, employed in the most detestable occupation,
immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an
instant call my attention from the actual scene in which
I was engaged, my spirits became unequal; I grew restless
and nervous. Every moment I feared to meet my persecutor.
Sometimes I sat with my eyes fixed on the ground, fearing
to raise them lest they should encounter the object which 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 201
I so much dreaded to behold. I feared to wander from the
sight of my fellow creatures lest when alone he should come
to claim his companion.
In the mean time I worked on, and my labour was
already considerably advanced. I looked towards its completion
with a tremulous and eager hope, which I dared not
trust myself to question but which was intermixed with obscure
forebodings of evil that made my heart sicken in my
bosom.
202 Frankenstein
Chapter 20
I sat one evening in my laboratory; the sun had set, and
the moon was just rising from the sea; I had not sufficient
light for my employment, and I remained idle, in a pause of
consideration of whether I should leave my labour for the
night or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention
to it. As I sat, a train of reflection occurred to me which led
me to consider the effects of what I was now doing. Three
years before, I was engaged in the same manner and had
created a fiend whose unparalleled barbarity had desolated
my heart and filled it forever with the bitterest remorse. I
was now about to form another being of whose dispositions
I was alike ignorant; she might become ten thousand times
more malignant than her mate and delight, for its own
sake, in murder and wretchedness. He had sworn to quit
the neighbourhood of man and hide himself in deserts, but
she had not; and she, who in all probability was to become
a thinking and reasoning animal, might refuse to comply
with a compact made before her creation. They might even
hate each other; the creature who already lived loathed his
own deformity, and might he not conceive a greater abhorrence
for it when it came before his eyes in the female form?
She also might turn with disgust from him to the superior
beauty of man; she might quit him, and he be again alone,
exasperated by the fresh provocation of being deserted by 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 203
one of his own species.
Even if they were to leave Europe and inhabit the deserts
of the new world, yet one of the first results of those sympathies
for which the daemon thirsted would be children, and
a race of devils would be propagated upon the earth who
might make the very existence of the species of man a condition
precarious and full of terror. Had I right, for my own
benefit, to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations? I
had before been moved by the sophisms of the being I had
created; I had been struck senseless by his fiendish threats;
but now, for the first time, the wickedness of my promise
burst upon me; I shuddered to think that future ages might
curse me as their pest, whose selfishness had not hesitated
to buy its own peace at the price, perhaps, of the existence
of the whole human race.
I trembled and my heart failed within me, when, on
looking up, I saw by the light of the moon the daemon at
the casement. A ghastly grin wrinkled his lips as he gazed
on me, where I sat fulfilling the task which he had allotted
to me. Yes, he had followed me in my travels; he had loitered
in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide and
desert heaths; and he now came to mark my progress and
claim the fulfillment of my promise.
As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the
utmost extent of malice and treachery. I thought with a sensation
of madness on my promise of creating another like to
him, and trembling with passion, tore to pieces the thing on
which I was engaged. The wretch saw me destroy the creature
on whose future existence he depended for happiness, 
204 Frankenstein
and with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew.
I left the room, and locking the door, made a solemn vow
in my own heart never to resume my labours; and then, with
trembling steps, I sought my own apartment. I was alone;
none were near me to dissipate the gloom and relieve me
from the sickening oppression of the most terrible reveries.
Several hours passed, and I remained near my window
gazing on the sea; it was almost motionless, for the winds
were hushed, and all nature reposed under the eye of the
quiet moon. A few fishing vessels alone specked the water,
and now and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound
of voices as the fishermen called to one another. I felt the
silence, although I was hardly conscious of its extreme
profundity, until my ear was suddenly arrested by the paddling
of oars near the shore, and a person landed close to
my house.
In a few minutes after, I heard the creaking of my door,
as if some one endeavoured to open it softly. I trembled
from head to foot; I felt a presentiment of who it was and
wished to rouse one of the peasants who dwelt in a cottage
not far from mine; but I was overcome by the sensation of
helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in
vain endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was
rooted to the spot.
Presently I heard the sound of footsteps along the passage;
the door opened, and the wretch whom I dreaded
appeared. Shutting the door, he approached me and said in
a smothered voice, ‘You have destroyed the work which you
began; what is it that you intend? Do you dare to break your 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 205
promise? I have endured toil and misery; I left Switzerland
with you; I crept along the shores of the Rhine, among its
willow islands and over the summits of its hills. I have dwelt
many months in the heaths of England and among the deserts
of Scotland. I have endured incalculable fatigue, and
cold, and hunger; do you dare destroy my hopes?’
‘Begone! I do break my promise; never will I create another
like yourself, equal in deformity and wickedness.’
‘Slave, I before reasoned with you, but you have proved
yourself unworthy of my condescension. Remember that I
have power; you believe yourself miserable, but I can make
you so wretched that the light of day will be hateful to you.
You are my creator, but I am your master; obey!’
‘The hour of my irresolution is past, and the period of
your power is arrived. Your threats cannot move me to do
an act of wickedness; but they confirm me in a determination
of not creating you a companion in vice. Shall I, in cool
blood, set loose upon the earth a daemon whose delight is
in death and wretchedness? Begone! I am firm, and your
words will only exasperate my rage.’
The monster saw my determination in my face and
gnashed his teeth in the impotence of anger. ‘Shall each
man,’ cried he, ‘find a wife for his bosom, and each beast
have his mate, and I be alone? I had feelings of affection,
and they were requited by detestation and scorn. Man! You
may hate, but beware! Your hours will pass in dread and
misery, and soon the bolt will fall which must ravish from
you your happiness forever. Are you to be happy while I
grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness? You can blast 
206 Frankenstein
my other passions, but revenge remains—revenge, henceforth
dearer than light or food! I may die, but first you, my
tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun that gazes on your
misery. Beware, for I am fearless and therefore powerful. I
will watch with the wiliness of a snake, that I may sting with
its venom. Man, you shall repent of the injuries you inflict.’
‘Devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sounds
of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and I am no
coward to bend beneath words. Leave me; I am inexorable.’
‘It is well. I go; but remember, I shall be with you on your
wedding-night.’
I started forward and exclaimed, ‘Villain! Before you
sign my death-warrant, be sure that you are yourself safe.’
I would have seized him, but he eluded me and quitted
the house with precipitation. In a few moments I saw him in
his boat, which shot across the waters with an arrowy swiftness
and was soon lost amidst the waves.
All was again silent, but his words rang in my ears. I
burned with rage to pursue the murderer of my peace and
precipitate him into the ocean. I walked up and down my
room hastily and perturbed, while my imagination conjured
up a thousand images to torment and sting me. Why
had I not followed him and closed with him in mortal
strife? But I had suffered him to depart, and he had directed
his course towards the mainland. I shuddered to think who
might be the next victim sacrificed to his insatiate revenge.
And then I thought again of his words—‘*I will be with you
on your wedding-night*.’ That, then, was the period fixed
for the fulfillment of my destiny. In that hour I should die 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 207
and at once satisfy and extinguish his malice. The prospect
did not move me to fear; yet when I thought of my beloved
Elizabeth, of her tears and endless sorrow, when she should
find her lover so barbarously snatched from her, tears, the
first I had shed for many months, streamed from my eyes,
and I resolved not to fall before my enemy without a bitter
struggle.
The night passed away, and the sun rose from the ocean;
my feelings became calmer, if it may be called calmness
when the violence of rage sinks into the depths of despair.
I left the house, the horrid scene of the last night’s contention,
and walked on the beach of the sea, which I almost
regarded as an insuperable barrier between me and my fellow
creatures; nay, a wish that such should prove the fact
stole across me. I desired that I might pass my life on that
barren rock, wearily, it is true, but uninterrupted by any
sudden shock of misery. If I returned, it was to be sacrificed
or to see those whom I most loved die under the grasp of a
daemon whom I had myself created.
I walked about the isle like a restless spectre, separated
from all it loved and miserable in the separation. When it became
noon, and the sun rose higher, I lay down on the grass
and was overpowered by a deep sleep. I had been awake the
whole of the preceding night, my nerves were agitated, and
my eyes inflamed by watching and misery. The sleep into
which I now sank refreshed me; and when I awoke, I again
felt as if I belonged to a race of human beings like myself,
and I began to reflect upon what had passed with greater
composure; yet still the words of the fiend rang in my ears 
208 Frankenstein
like a death-knell; they appeared like a dream, yet distinct
and oppressive as a reality.
The sun had far descended, and I still sat on the shore,
satisfying my appetite, which had become ravenous, with
an oaten cake, when I saw a fishing-boat land close to me,
and one of the men brought me a packet; it contained letters
from Geneva, and one from Clerval entreating me to join
him. He said that he was wearing away his time fruitlessly
where he was, that letters from the friends he had formed in
London desired his return to complete the negotiation they
had entered into for his Indian enterprise. He could not any
longer delay his departure; but as his journey to London
might be followed, even sooner than he now conjectured, by
his longer voyage, he entreated me to bestow as much of my
society on him as I could spare. He besought me, therefore,
to leave my solitary isle and to meet him at Perth, that we
might proceed southwards together. This letter in a degree
recalled me to life, and I determined to quit my island at the
expiration of two days.
Yet, before I departed, there was a task to perform, on
which I shuddered to reflect; I must pack up my chemical
instruments, and for that purpose I must enter the room
which had been the scene of my odious work, and I must
handle those utensils the sight of which was sickening to
me. The next morning, at daybreak, I summoned sufficient
courage and unlocked the door of my laboratory. The remains
of the half-finished creature, whom I had destroyed,
lay scattered on the floor, and I almost felt as if I had mangled
the living flesh of a human being. I paused to collect 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 209
myself and then entered the chamber. With trembling hand
I conveyed the instruments out of the room, but I reflected
that I ought not to leave the relics of my work to excite the
horror and suspicion of the peasants; and I accordingly put
them into a basket, with a great quantity of stones, and laying
them up, determined to throw them into the sea that
very night; and in the meantime I sat upon the beach, employed
in cleaning and arranging my chemical apparatus.
Nothing could be more complete than the alteration that
had taken place in my feelings since the night of the appearance
of the daemon. I had before regarded my promise
with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with whatever consequences,
must be fulfilled; but I now felt as if a film had
been taken from before my eyes and that I for the first time
saw clearly. The idea of renewing my labours did not for one
instant occur to me; the threat I had heard weighed on my
thoughts, but I did not reflect that a voluntary act of mine
could avert it. I had resolved in my own mind that to create
another like the fiend I had first made would be an act
of the basest and most atrocious selfishness, and I banished
from my mind every thought that could lead to a different
conclusion.
Between two and three in the morning the moon rose;
and I then, putting my basket aboard a little skiff, sailed
out about four miles from the shore. The scene was perfectly
solitary; a few boats were returning towards land, but
I sailed away from them. I felt as if I was about the commission
of a dreadful crime and avoided with shuddering
anxiety any encounter with my fellow creatures. At one 
210 Frankenstein
time the moon, which had before been clear, was suddenly
overspread by a thick cloud, and I took advantage of the
moment of darkness and cast my basket into the sea; I listened
to the gurgling sound as it sank and then sailed away
from the spot. The sky became clouded, but the air was pure,
although chilled by the northeast breeze that was then rising.
But it refreshed me and filled me with such agreeable
sensations that I resolved to prolong my stay on the water,
and fixing the rudder in a direct position, stretched myself
at the bottom of the boat. Clouds hid the moon, everything
was obscure, and I heard only the sound of the boat as its
keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in a
short time I slept soundly.
I do not know how long I remained in this situation, but
when I awoke I found that the sun had already mounted
considerably. The wind was high, and the waves continually
threatened the safety of my little skiff. I found that the wind
was northeast and must have driven me far from the coast
from which I had embarked. I endeavoured to change my
course but quickly found that if I again made the attempt
the boat would be instantly filled with water. Thus situated,
my only resource was to drive before the wind. I confess
that I felt a few sensations of terror. I had no compass with
me and was so slenderly acquainted with the geography of
this part of the world that the sun was of little benefit to
me. I might be driven into the wide Atlantic and feel all
the tortures of starvation or be swallowed up in the immeasurable
waters that roared and buffeted around me. I had
already been out many hours and felt the torment of a burn-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 211
ing thirst, a prelude to my other sufferings. I looked on the
heavens, which were covered by clouds that flew before the
wind, only to be replaced by others; I looked upon the sea;
it was to be my grave. ‘Fiend,’ I exclaimed, ‘your task is already
fulfilled!’ I thought of Elizabeth, of my father, and of
Clerval—all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy
his sanguinary and merciless passions. This idea plunged
me into a reverie so despairing and frightful that even now,
when the scene is on the point of closing before me forever,
I shudder to reflect on it.
Some hours passed thus; but by degrees, as the sun
declined towards the horizon, the wind died away into a
gentle breeze and the sea became free from breakers. But
these gave place to a heavy swell; I felt sick and hardly able
to hold the rudder, when suddenly I saw a line of high land
towards the south.
Almost spent, as I was, by fatigue and the dreadful suspense
I endured for several hours, this sudden certainty of
life rushed like a flood of warm joy to my heart, and tears
gushed from my eyes.
How mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that
clinging love we have of life even in the excess of misery! I
constructed another sail with a part of my dress and eagerly
steered my course towards the land. It had a wild and rocky
appearance, but as I approached nearer I easily perceived
the traces of cultivation. I saw vessels near the shore and
found myself suddenly transported back to the neighbourhood
of civilized man. I carefully traced the windings of
the land and hailed a steeple which I at length saw issuing 
212 Frankenstein
from behind a small promontory. As I was in a state of extreme
debility, I resolved to sail directly towards the town,
as a place where I could most easily procure nourishment.
Fortunately I had money with me. As I turned the promontory
I perceived a small neat town and a good harbour,
which I entered, my heart bounding with joy at my unexpected
escape.
As I was occupied in fixing the boat and arranging the
sails, several people crowded towards the spot. They seemed
much surprised at my appearance, but instead of offering
me any assistance, whispered together with gestures that at
any other time might have produced in me a slight sensation
of alarm. As it was, I merely remarked that they spoke
English, and I therefore addressed them in that language.
‘My good friends,’ said I, ‘will you be so kind as to tell me
the name of this town and inform me where I am?’
‘You will know that soon enough,’ replied a man with a
hoarse voice. ‘Maybe you are come to a place that will not
prove much to your taste, but you will not be consulted as
to your quarters, I promise you.’
I was exceedingly surprised on receiving so rude an
answer from a stranger, and I was also disconcerted on
perceiving the frowning and angry countenances of his
companions. ‘Why do you answer me so roughly?’ I replied.
‘Surely it is not the custom of Englishmen to receive strangers
so inhospitably.’
‘I do not know,’ said the man, ‘what the custom of the
English may be, but it is the custom of the Irish to hate villains.’
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 213
While this strange dialogue continued, I perceived the
crowd rapidly increase. Their faces expressed a mixture of
curiosity and anger, which annoyed and in some degree
alarmed me. I inquired the way to the inn, but no one replied.
I then moved forward, and a murmuring sound arose
from the crowd as they followed and surrounded me, when
an ill-looking man approaching tapped me on the shoulder
and said, ‘Come, sir, you must follow me to Mr. Kirwin’s to
give an account of yourself.’
‘Who is Mr. Kirwin? Why am I to give an account of myself?
Is not this a free country?’
‘Ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. Mr. Kirwin is a
magistrate, and you are to give an account of the death of a
gentleman who was found murdered here last night.’
This answer startled me, but I presently recovered myself.
I was innocent; that could easily be proved; accordingly I
followed my conductor in silence and was led to one of the
best houses in the town. I was ready to sink from fatigue
and hunger, but being surrounded by a crowd, I thought
it politic to rouse all my strength, that no physical debility
might be construed into apprehension or conscious
guilt. Little did I then expect the calamity that was in a few
moments to overwhelm me and extinguish in horror and
despair all fear of ignominy or death.
I must pause here, for it requires all my fortitude to recall
the memory of the frightful events which I am about to relate,
in proper detail, to my recollection.
214 Frankenstein
Chapter 21
I was soon introduced into the presence of the magistrate,
an old benevolent man with calm and mild manners. He
looked upon me, however, with some degree of severity,
and then, turning towards my conductors, he asked who
appeared as witnesses on this occasion.
About half a dozen men came forward; and, one being
selected by the magistrate, he deposed that he had been out
fishing the night before with his son and brother-in-law,
Daniel Nugent, when, about ten o’clock, they observed a
strong northerly blast rising, and they accordingly put in
for port. It was a very dark night, as the moon had not yet
risen; they did not land at the harbour, but, as they had been
accustomed, at a creek about two miles below. He walked on
first, carrying a part of the fishing tackle, and his companions
followed him at some distance. As he was proceeding
along the sands, he struck his foot against something and
fell at his length on the ground. His companions came up to
assist him, and by the light of their lantern they found that
he had fallen on the body of a man, who was to all appearance
dead. Their first supposition was that it was the corpse
of some person who had been drowned and was thrown on
shore by the waves, but on examination they found that the
clothes were not wet and even that the body was not then
cold. They instantly carried it to the cottage of an old wom-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 215
an near the spot and endeavoured, but in vain, to restore it
to life. It appeared to be a handsome young man, about five
and twenty years of age. He had apparently been strangled,
for there was no sign of any violence except the black mark
of fingers on his neck.
The first part of this deposition did not in the least interest
me, but when the mark of the fingers was mentioned I
remembered the murder of my brother and felt myself extremely
agitated; my limbs trembled, and a mist came over
my eyes, which obliged me to lean on a chair for support.
The magistrate observed me with a keen eye and of course
drew an unfavourable augury from my manner.
The son confirmed his father’s account, but when Daniel
Nugent was called he swore positively that just before the
fall of his companion, he saw a boat, with a single man in
it, at a short distance from the shore; and as far as he could
judge by the light of a few stars, it was the same boat in
which I had just landed.
A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was
standing at the door of her cottage, waiting for the return
of the fishermen, about an hour before she heard of the discovery
of the body, when she saw a boat with only one man
in it push off from that part of the shore where the corpse
was afterwards found.
Another woman confirmed the account of the fishermen
having brought the body into her house; it was not cold.
They put it into a bed and rubbed it, and Daniel went to the
town for an apothecary, but life was quite gone.
Several other men were examined concerning my land-
216 Frankenstein
ing, and they agreed that, with the strong north wind that
had arisen during the night, it was very probable that I had
beaten about for many hours and had been obliged to return
nearly to the same spot from which I had departed.
Besides, they observed that it appeared that I had brought
the body from another place, and it was likely that as I did
not appear to know the shore, I might have put into the harbour
ignorant of the distance of the town of—— from the
place where I had deposited the corpse.
Mr. Kirwin, on hearing this evidence, desired that I
should be taken into the room where the body lay for interment,
that it might be observed what effect the sight of it
would produce upon me. This idea was probably suggested
by the extreme agitation I had exhibited when the mode of
the murder had been described. I was accordingly conducted,
by the magistrate and several other persons, to the inn. I
could not help being struck by the strange coincidences that
had taken place during this eventful night; but, knowing
that I had been conversing with several persons in the island
I had inhabited about the time that the body had been
found, I was perfectly tranquil as to the consequences of
the affair.
I entered the room where the corpse lay and was led up
to the coffin. How can I describe my sensations on beholding
it? I feel yet parched with horror, nor can I reflect on
that terrible moment without shuddering and agony. The
examination, the presence of the magistrate and witnesses,
passed like a dream from my memory when I saw the lifeless
form of Henry Clerval stretched before me. I gasped 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 217
for breath, and throwing myself on the body, I exclaimed,
‘Have my murderous machinations deprived you also, my
dearest Henry, of life? Two I have already destroyed; other
victims await their destiny; but you, Clerval, my friend, my
benefactor—‘
The human frame could no longer support the agonies
that I endured, and I was carried out of the room in strong
convulsions.
A fever succeeded to this. I lay for two months on the
point of death; my ravings, as I afterwards heard, were
frightful; I called myself the murderer of William, of Justine,
and of Clerval. Sometimes I entreated my attendants
to assist me in the destruction of the fiend by whom I was
tormented; and at others I felt the fingers of the monster
already grasping my neck, and screamed aloud with agony
and terror. Fortunately, as I spoke my native language, Mr.
Kirwin alone understood me; but my gestures and bitter
cries were sufficient to affright the other witnesses.
Why did I not die? More miserable than man ever was
before, why did I not sink into forgetfulness and rest? Death
snatches away many blooming children, the only hopes of
their doting parents; how many brides and youthful lovers
have been one day in the bloom of health and hope, and
the next a prey for worms and the decay of the tomb! Of
what materials was I made that I could thus resist so many
shocks, which, like the turning of the wheel, continually renewed
the torture?
But I was doomed to live and in two months found myself
as awaking from a dream, in a prison, stretched on a 
218 Frankenstein
wretched bed, surrounded by jailers, turnkeys, bolts, and
all the miserable apparatus of a dungeon. It was morning,
I remember, when I thus awoke to understanding; I had
forgotten the particulars of what had happened and only
felt as if some great misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed
me; but when I looked around and saw the barred windows
and the squalidness of the room in which I was, all flashed
across my memory and I groaned bitterly.
This sound disturbed an old woman who was sleeping in
a chair beside me. She was a hired nurse, the wife of one of
the turnkeys, and her countenance expressed all those bad
qualities which often characterize that class. The lines of her
face were hard and rude, like that of persons accustomed to
see without sympathizing in sights of misery. Her tone expressed
her entire indifference; she addressed me in English,
and the voice struck me as one that I had heard during my
sufferings. ‘Are you better now, sir?’ said she.
I replied in the same language, with a feeble voice, ‘I believe
I am; but if it be all true, if indeed I did not dream, I am
sorry that I am still alive to feel this misery and horror.’
‘For that matter,’ replied the old woman, ‘if you mean
about the gentleman you murdered, I believe that it were
better for you if you were dead, for I fancy it will go hard
with you! However, that’s none of my business; I am sent to
nurse you and get you well; I do my duty with a safe conscience;
it were well if everybody did the same.’
I turned with loathing from the woman who could utter
so unfeeling a speech to a person just saved, on the very
edge of death; but I felt languid and unable to reflect on all 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 219
that had passed. The whole series of my life appeared to me
as a dream; I sometimes doubted if indeed it were all true,
for it never presented itself to my mind with the force of
reality.
As the images that floated before me became more distinct,
I grew feverish; a darkness pressed around me; no one
was near me who soothed me with the gentle voice of love;
no dear hand supported me. The physician came and prescribed
medicines, and the old woman prepared them for
me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the
expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage
of the second. Who could be interested in the fate of a murderer
but the hangman who would gain his fee?
These were my first reflections, but I soon learned that
Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused
the best room in the prison to be prepared for me (wretched
indeed was the best); and it was he who had provided a
physician and a nurse. It is true, he seldom came to see me,
for although he ardently desired to relieve the sufferings
of every human creature, he did not wish to be present at
the agonies and miserable ravings of a murderer. He came,
therefore, sometimes to see that I was not neglected, but his
visits were short and with long intervals.
One day, while I was gradually recovering, I was seated
in a chair, my eyes half open and my cheeks livid like
those in death. I was overcome by gloom and misery and
often reflected I had better seek death than desire to remain
in a world which to me was replete with wretchedness. At
one time I considered whether I should not declare myself 
220 Frankenstein
guilty and suffer the penalty of the law, less innocent than
poor Justine had been. Such were my thoughts when the
door of my apartment was opened and Mr. Kirwin entered.
His countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; he
drew a chair close to mine and addressed me in French, ‘I
fear that this place is very shocking to you; can I do anything
to make you more comfortable?’
‘I thank you, but all that you mention is nothing to me;
on the whole earth there is no comfort which I am capable
of receiving.’
‘I know that the sympathy of a stranger can be but of
little relief to one borne down as you are by so strange a
misfortune. But you will, I hope, soon quit this melancholy
abode, for doubtless evidence can easily be brought to free
you from the criminal charge.’
‘That is my least concern; I am, by a course of strange
events, become the most miserable of mortals. Persecuted
and tortured as I am and have been, can death be any evil
to me?’
‘Nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonizing
than the strange chances that have lately occurred. You
were thrown, by some surprising accident, on this shore, renowned
for its hospitality, seized immediately, and charged
with murder. The first sight that was presented to your eyes
was the body of your friend, murdered in so unaccountable
a manner and placed, as it were, by some fiend across your
path.’
As Mr. Kirwin said this, notwithstanding the agitation I
endured on this retrospect of my sufferings, I also felt con-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 221
siderable surprise at the knowledge he seemed to possess
concerning me. I suppose some astonishment was exhibited
in my countenance, for Mr. Kirwin hastened to say, ‘Immediately
upon your being taken ill, all the papers that were
on your person were brought me, and I examined them that
I might discover some trace by which I could send to your
relations an account of your misfortune and illness. I found
several letters, and, among others, one which I discovered
from its commencement to be from your father. I instantly
wrote to Geneva; nearly two months have elapsed since the
departure of my letter. But you are ill; even now you tremble;
you are unfit for agitation of any kind.’
‘This suspense is a thousand times worse than the most
horrible event; tell me what new scene of death has been
acted, and whose murder I am now to lament?’
‘Your family is perfectly well,’ said Mr. Kirwin with gentleness;
‘and someone, a friend, is come to visit you.’
I know not by what chain of thought the idea presented
itself, but it instantly darted into my mind that the murderer
had come to mock at my misery and taunt me with
the death of Clerval, as a new incitement for me to comply
with his hellish desires. I put my hand before my eyes, and
cried out in agony, ‘Oh! Take him away! I cannot see him;
for God’s sake, do not let him enter!’
Mr. Kirwin regarded me with a troubled countenance.
He could not help regarding my exclamation as a presumption
of my guilt and said in rather a severe tone, ‘I should
have thought, young man, that the presence of your father
would have been welcome instead of inspiring such violent 
222 Frankenstein
repugnance.’
‘My father!’ cried I, while every feature and every muscle
was relaxed from anguish to pleasure. ‘Is my father indeed
come? How kind, how very kind! But where is he, why does
he not hasten to me?’
My change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate;
perhaps he thought that my former exclamation
was a momentary return of delirium, and now he instantly
resumed his former benevolence. He rose and quitted the
room with my nurse, and in a moment my father entered it.
Nothing, at this moment, could have given me greater
pleasure than the arrival of my father. I stretched out my
hand to him and cried, ‘Are you, then, safe—and Elizabeth—and
Ernest?’
My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare
and endeavoured, by dwelling on these subjects so interesting
to my heart, to raise my desponding spirits; but he soon
felt that a prison cannot be the abode of cheerfulness. ‘What
a place is this that you inhabit, my son!’ said he, looking
mournfully at the barred windows and wretched appearance
of the room. ‘You travelled to seek happiness, but a
fatality seems to pursue you. And poor Clerval—‘
The name of my unfortunate and murdered friend was
an agitation too great to be endured in my weak state; I shed
tears.
‘Alas! Yes, my father,’ replied I; ‘some destiny of the most
horrible kind hangs over me, and I must live to fulfil it, or
surely I should have died on the coffin of Henry.’
We were not allowed to converse for any length of time, 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 223
for the precarious state of my health rendered every precaution
necessary that could ensure tranquillity. Mr. Kirwin
came in and insisted that my strength should not be exhausted
by too much exertion. But the appearance of my
father was to me like that of my good angel, and I gradually
recovered my health.
As my sickness quitted me, I was absorbed by a gloomy
and black melancholy that nothing could dissipate. The image
of Clerval was forever before me, ghastly and murdered.
More than once the agitation into which these reflections
threw me made my friends dread a dangerous relapse. Alas!
Why did they preserve so miserable and detested a life? It was
surely that I might fulfil my destiny, which is now drawing
to a close. Soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these
throbbings and relieve me from the mighty weight of anguish
that bears me to the dust; and, in executing the award
of justice, I shall also sink to rest. Then the appearance of
death was distant, although the wish was ever present to my
thoughts; and I often sat for hours motionless and speechless,
wishing for some mighty revolution that might bury
me and my destroyer in its ruins.
The season of the assizes approached. I had already been
three months in prison, and although I was still weak and in
continual danger of a relapse, I was obliged to travel nearly
a hundred miles to the country town where the court was
held. Mr. Kirwin charged himself with every care of collecting
witnesses and arranging my defence. I was spared
the disgrace of appearing publicly as a criminal, as the case
was not brought before the court that decides on life and 
224 Frankenstein
death. The grand jury rejected the bill, on its being proved
that I was on the Orkney Islands at the hour the body of my
friend was found; and a fortnight after my removal I was
liberated from prison.
My father was enraptured on finding me freed from the
vexations of a criminal charge, that I was again allowed to
breathe the fresh atmosphere and permitted to return to my
native country. I did not participate in these feelings, for
to me the walls of a dungeon or a palace were alike hateful.
The cup of life was poisoned forever, and although the
sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, I
saw around me nothing but a dense and frightful darkness,
penetrated by no light but the glimmer of two eyes that
glared upon me. Sometimes they were the expressive eyes
of Henry, languishing in death, the dark orbs nearly covered
by the lids and the long black lashes that fringed them;
sometimes it was the watery, clouded eyes of the monster, as
I first saw them in my chamber at Ingolstadt.
My father tried to awaken in me the feelings of affection.
He talked of Geneva, which I should soon visit, of Elizabeth
and Ernest; but these words only drew deep groans
from me. Sometimes, indeed, I felt a wish for happiness and
thought with melancholy delight of my beloved cousin or
longed, with a devouring *maladie du pays*, to see once
more the blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been so dear
to me in early childhood; but my general state of feeling
was a torpor in which a prison was as welcome a residence
as the divinest scene in nature; and these fits were seldom
interrupted but by paroxysms of anguish and despair. At 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 225
these moments I often endeavoured to put an end to the existence
I loathed, and it required unceasing attendance and
vigilance to restrain me from committing some dreadful
act of violence.
Yet one duty remained to me, the recollection of which
finally triumphed over my selfish despair. It was necessary
that I should return without delay to Geneva, there to
watch over the lives of those I so fondly loved and to lie
in wait for the murderer, that if any chance led me to the
place of his concealment, or if he dared again to blast me
by his presence, I might, with unfailing aim, put an end to
the existence of the monstrous image which I had endued
with the mockery of a soul still more monstrous. My father
still desired to delay our departure, fearful that I could
not sustain the fatigues of a journey, for I was a shattered
wreck—the shadow of a human being. My strength was
gone. I was a mere skeleton, and fever night and day preyed
upon my wasted frame.
Still, as I urged our leaving Ireland with such inquietude
and impatience, my father thought it best to yield. We took
our passage on board a vessel bound for Havre-de-Grace
and sailed with a fair wind from the Irish shores. It was
midnight. I lay on the deck looking at the stars and listening
to the dashing of the waves. I hailed the darkness that
shut Ireland from my sight, and my pulse beat with a feverish
joy when I reflected that I should soon see Geneva. The
past appeared to me in the light of a frightful dream; yet the
vessel in which I was, the wind that blew me from the detested
shore of Ireland, and the sea which surrounded me 
226 Frankenstein
told me too forcibly that I was deceived by no vision and
that Clerval, my friend and dearest companion, had fallen
a victim to me and the monster of my creation. I repassed,
in my memory, my whole life—my quiet happiness while
residing with my family in Geneva, the death of my mother,
and my departure for Ingolstadt. I remembered, shuddering,
the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on to the creation of
my hideous enemy, and I called to mind the night in which
he first lived. I was unable to pursue the train of thought; a
thousand feelings pressed upon me, and I wept bitterly.
Ever since my recovery from the fever I had been in
the custom of taking every night a small quantity of laudanum,
for it was by means of this drug only that I was
enabled to gain the rest necessary for the preservation of
life. Oppressed by the recollection of my various misfortunes,
I now swallowed double my usual quantity and soon
slept profoundly. But sleep did not afford me respite from
thought and misery; my dreams presented a thousand objects
that scared me. Towards morning I was possessed by
a kind of nightmare; I felt the fiend’s grasp in my neck and
could not free myself from it; groans and cries rang in my
ears. My father, who was watching over me, perceiving my
restlessness, awoke me; the dashing waves were around, the
cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: a sense of security,
a feeling that a truce was established between the present
hour and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to me
a kind of calm forgetfulness, of which the human mind is
by its structure peculiarly susceptible.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 227
Chapter 22
The voyage came to an end. We landed, and proceeded
to Paris. I soon found that I had overtaxed my strength
and that I must repose before I could continue my journey.
My father’s care and attentions were indefatigable, but he
did not know the origin of my sufferings and sought erroneous
methods to remedy the incurable ill. He wished me
to seek amusement in society. I abhorred the face of man.
Oh, not abhorred! They were my brethren, my fellow beings,
and I felt attracted even to the most repulsive among them,
as to creatures of an angelic nature and celestial mechanism.
But I felt that I had no right to share their intercourse.
I had unchained an enemy among them whose joy it was
to shed their blood and to revel in their groans. How they
would, each and all, abhor me and hunt me from the world
did they know my unhallowed acts and the crimes which
had their source in me!
My father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society
and strove by various arguments to banish my despair.
Sometimes he thought that I felt deeply the degradation of
being obliged to answer a charge of murder, and he endeavoured
to prove to me the futility of pride.
‘Alas! My father,’ said I, ‘how little do you know me. Human
beings, their feelings and passions, would indeed be
degraded if such a wretch as I felt pride. Justine, poor un-
228 Frankenstein
happy Justine, was as innocent as I, and she suffered the
same charge; she died for it; and I am the cause of this—I
murdered her. William, Justine, and Henry—they all died
by my hands.’
My father had often, during my imprisonment, heard me
make the same assertion; when I thus accused myself, he
sometimes seemed to desire an explanation, and at others
he appeared to consider it as the offspring of delirium, and
that, during my illness, some idea of this kind had presented
itself to my imagination, the remembrance of which I
preserved in my convalescence. I avoided explanation and
maintained a continual silence concerning the wretch I had
created. I had a persuasion that I should be supposed mad,
and this in itself would forever have chained my tongue. But,
besides, I could not bring myself to disclose a secret which
would fill my hearer with consternation and make fear
and unnatural horror the inmates of his breast. I checked,
therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy and was silent
when I would have given the world to have confided the fatal
secret. Yet, still, words like those I have recorded would
burst uncontrollably from me. I could offer no explanation
of them, but their truth in part relieved the burden of my
mysterious woe.
Upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of
unbounded wonder, ‘My dearest Victor, what infatuation is
this? My dear son, I entreat you never to make such an assertion
again.’
‘I am not mad,’ I cried energetically; ‘the sun and the
heavens, who have viewed my operations, can bear wit-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 229
ness of my truth. I am the assassin of those most innocent
victims; they died by my machinations. A thousand times
would I have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have
saved their lives; but I could not, my father, indeed I could
not sacrifice the whole human race.’
The conclusion of this speech convinced my father that
my ideas were deranged, and he instantly changed the subject
of our conversation and endeavoured to alter the course
of my thoughts. He wished as much as possible to obliterate
the memory of the scenes that had taken place in Ireland
and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of my
misfortunes.
As time passed away I became more calm; misery had
her dwelling in my heart, but I no longer talked in the same
incoherent manner of my own crimes; sufficient for me was
the consciousness of them. By the utmost self-violence I
curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness, which sometimes
desired to declare itself to the whole world, and my
manners were calmer and more composed than they had
ever been since my journey to the sea of ice.
A few days before we left Paris on our way to Switzerland
I received the following letter from Elizabeth:
My dear Friend,
It gave me the greatest pleasure to receive a letter from
my uncle dated at Paris; you are no longer at a formidable
distance, and I may hope to see you in less than a fortnight.
My poor cousin, how much you must have suffered! I expect
to see you looking even more ill than when you quitted Geneva.
This winter has been passed most miserably, tortured 
230 Frankenstein
as I have been by anxious suspense; yet I hope to see peace
in your countenance and to find that your heart is not totally
void of comfort and tranquillity.
Yet I fear that the same feelings now exist that made you
so miserable a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. I
would not disturb you at this period, when so many misfortunes
weigh upon you, but a conversation that I had with
my uncle previous to his departure renders some explanation
necessary before we meet.
Explanation! You may possibly say, What can Elizabeth
have to explain? If you really say this, my questions are answered
and all my doubts satisfied. But you are distant from
me, and it is possible that you may dread and yet be pleased
with this explanation; and in a probability of this being the
case, I dare not any longer postpone writing what, during
your absence, I have often wished to express to you but have
never had the courage to begin.
You well know, Victor, that our union had been the favourite
plan of your parents ever since our infancy. We
were told this when young, and taught to look forward to
it as an event that would certainly take place. We were affectionate
playfellows during childhood, and, I believe, dear
and valued friends to one another as we grew older. But as
brother and sister often entertain a lively affection towards
each other without desiring a more intimate union, may not
such also be our case? Tell me, dearest Victor. Answer me,
I conjure you by our mutual happiness, with simple truth—
Do you not love another?
You have travelled; you have spent several years of your 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 231
life at Ingolstadt; and I confess to you, my friend, that when
I saw you last autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from
the society of every creature, I could not help supposing
that you might regret our connection and believe yourself
bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of your parents, although
they opposed themselves to your inclinations. But
this is false reasoning. I confess to you, my friend, that I
love you and that in my airy dreams of futurity you have
been my constant friend and companion. But it is your happiness
I desire as well as my own when I declare to you that
our marriage would render me eternally miserable unless it
were the dictate of your own free choice. Even now I weep
to think that, borne down as you are by the cruellest misfortunes,
you may stifle, by the word ‘honour,’ all hope of
that love and happiness which would alone restore you to
yourself. I, who have so disinterested an affection for you,
may increase your miseries tenfold by being an obstacle to
your wishes. Ah! Victor, be assured that your cousin and
playmate has too sincere a love for you not to be made miserable
by this supposition. Be happy, my friend; and if you
obey me in this one request, remain satisfied that nothing
on earth will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity.
Do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow,
or the next day, or even until you come, if it will give
you pain. My uncle will send me news of your health, and if
I see but one smile on your lips when we meet, occasioned
by this or any other exertion of mine, I shall need no other
happiness.
Elizabeth Lavenza
232 Frankenstein
Geneva, May 18th, 17—
This letter revived in my memory what I had before forgotten,
the threat of the fiend—‘*I will be with you on your
wedding-night!*’ Such was my sentence, and on that night
would the daemon employ every art to destroy me and tear
me from the glimpse of happiness which promised partly
to console my sufferings. On that night he had determined
to consummate his crimes by my death. Well, be it so; a
deadly struggle would then assuredly take place, in which
if he were victorious I should be at peace and his power
over me be at an end. If he were vanquished, I should be a
free man. Alas! What freedom? Such as the peasant enjoys
when his family have been massacred before his eyes, his
cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is turned adrift,
homeless, penniless, and alone, but free. Such would be my
liberty except that in my Elizabeth I possessed a treasure,
alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which
would pursue me until death.
Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and reread her letter,
and some softened feelings stole into my heart and dared
to whisper paradisiacal dreams of love and joy; but the apple
was already eaten, and the angel’s arm bared to drive
me from all hope. Yet I would die to make her happy. If
the monster executed his threat, death was inevitable; yet,
again, I considered whether my marriage would hasten
my fate. My destruction might indeed arrive a few months
sooner, but if my torturer should suspect that I postponed it,
influenced by his menaces, he would surely find other and
perhaps more dreadful means of revenge. He had vowed *to 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 233
be with me on my wedding-night*, yet he did not consider
that threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, for as
if to show me that he was not yet satiated with blood, he had
murdered Clerval immediately after the enunciation of his
threats. I resolved, therefore, that if my immediate union
with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my father’s
happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life should
not retard it a single hour.
In this state of mind I wrote to Elizabeth. My letter was
calm and affectionate. ‘I fear, my beloved girl,’ I said, ‘little
happiness remains for us on earth; yet all that I may one day
enjoy is centred in you. Chase away your idle fears; to you
alone do I consecrate my life and my endeavours for contentment.
I have one secret, Elizabeth, a dreadful one; when
revealed to you, it will chill your frame with horror, and
then, far from being surprised at my misery, you will only
wonder that I survive what I have endured. I will confide
this tale of misery and terror to you the day after our marriage
shall take place, for, my sweet cousin, there must be
perfect confidence between us. But until then, I conjure you,
do not mention or allude to it. This I most earnestly entreat,
and I know you will comply.’
In about a week after the arrival of Elizabeth’s letter
we returned to Geneva. The sweet girl welcomed me with
warm affection, yet tears were in her eyes as she beheld my
emaciated frame and feverish cheeks. I saw a change in her
also. She was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly vivacity
that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and
soft looks of compassion made her a more fit companion for 
234 Frankenstein
one blasted and miserable as I was.
The tranquillity which I now enjoyed did not endure.
Memory brought madness with it, and when I thought of
what had passed, a real insanity possessed me; sometimes
I was furious and burnt with rage, sometimes low and despondent.
I neither spoke nor looked at anyone, but sat
motionless, bewildered by the multitude of miseries that
overcame me.
Elizabeth alone had the power to draw me from these
fits; her gentle voice would soothe me when transported
by passion and inspire me with human feelings when sunk
in torpor. She wept with me and for me. When reason returned,
she would remonstrate and endeavour to inspire
me with resignation. Ah! It is well for the unfortunate to be
resigned, but for the guilty there is no peace. The agonies
of remorse poison the luxury there is otherwise sometimes
found in indulging the excess of grief.
Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate
marriage with Elizabeth. I remained silent.
‘Have you, then, some other attachment?’
‘None on earth. I love Elizabeth and look forward to our
union with delight. Let the day therefore be fixed; and on it
I will consecrate myself, in life or death, to the happiness of
my cousin.’
‘My dear Victor, do not speak thus. Heavy misfortunes
have befallen us, but let us only cling closer to what remains
and transfer our love for those whom we have lost to those
who yet live. Our circle will be small but bound close by
the ties of affection and mutual misfortune. And when time 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 235
shall have softened your despair, new and dear objects of
care will be born to replace those of whom we have been so
cruelly deprived.’
Such were the lessons of my father. But to me the remembrance
of the threat returned; nor can you wonder
that, omnipotent as the fiend had yet been in his deeds of
blood, I should almost regard him as invincible, and that
when he had pronounced the words ‘*I shall be with you
on your wedding-night*,’ I should regard the threatened
fate as unavoidable. But death was no evil to me if the loss
of Elizabeth were balanced with it, and I therefore, with
a contented and even cheerful countenance, agreed with
my father that if my cousin would consent, the ceremony
should take place in ten days, and thus put, as I imagined,
the seal to my fate.
Great God! If for one instant I had thought what might
be the hellish intention of my fiendish adversary, I would
rather have banished myself forever from my native country
and wandered a friendless outcast over the earth than
have consented to this miserable marriage. But, as if possessed
of magic powers, the monster had blinded me to his
real intentions; and when I thought that I had prepared only
my own death, I hastened that of a far dearer victim.
As the period fixed for our marriage drew nearer, whether
from cowardice or a prophetic feeling, I felt my heart sink
within me. But I concealed my feelings by an appearance of
hilarity that brought smiles and joy to the countenance of
my father, but hardly deceived the everwatchful and nicer
eye of Elizabeth. She looked forward to our union with 
236 Frankenstein
placid contentment, not unmingled with a little fear, which
past misfortunes had impressed, that what now appeared
certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate into an
airy dream and leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret.
Preparations were made for the event, congratulatory
visits were received, and all wore a smiling appearance. I
shut up, as well as I could, in my own heart the anxiety that
preyed there and entered with seeming earnestness into the
plans of my father, although they might only serve as the
decorations of my tragedy. Through my father’s exertions
a part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to
her by the Austrian government. A small possession on the
shores of Como belonged to her. It was agreed that, immediately
after our union, we should proceed to Villa Lavenza
and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful
lake near which it stood.
In the meantime I took every precaution to defend my
person in case the fiend should openly attack me. I carried
pistols and a dagger constantly about me and was ever on
the watch to prevent artifice, and by these means gained
a greater degree of tranquillity. Indeed, as the period approached,
the threat appeared more as a delusion, not to be
regarded as worthy to disturb my peace, while the happiness
I hoped for in my marriage wore a greater appearance of
certainty as the day fixed for its solemnization drew nearer
and I heard it continually spoken of as an occurrence which
no accident could possibly prevent.
Elizabeth seemed happy; my tranquil demeanour con-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 237
tributed greatly to calm her mind. But on the day that was
to fulfil my wishes and my destiny, she was melancholy,
and a presentiment of evil pervaded her; and perhaps also
she thought of the dreadful secret which I had promised
to reveal to her on the following day. My father was in the
meantime overjoyed and in the bustle of preparation only
recognized in the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of
a bride.
After the ceremony was performed a large party assembled
at my father’s, but it was agreed that Elizabeth and I
should commence our journey by water, sleeping that night
at Evian and continuing our voyage on the following day.
The day was fair, the wind favourable; all smiled on our
nuptial embarkation.
Those were the last moments of my life during which I enjoyed
the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along; the
sun was hot, but we were sheltered from its rays by a kind
of canopy while we enjoyed the beauty of the scene, sometimes
on one side of the lake, where we saw Mont Saleve,
the pleasant banks of Montalegre, and at a distance, surmounting
all, the beautiful Mont Blanc and the assemblage
of snowy mountains that in vain endeavour to emulate her;
sometimes coasting the opposite banks, we saw the mighty
Jura opposing its dark side to the ambition that would quit
its native country, and an almost insurmountable barrier to
the invader who should wish to enslave it.
I took the hand of Elizabeth. ‘You are sorrowful, my love.
Ah! If you knew what I have suffered and what I may yet
endure, you would endeavour to let me taste the quiet and 
238 Frankenstein
freedom from despair that this one day at least permits me
to enjoy.’
‘Be happy, my dear Victor,’ replied Elizabeth; ‘there
is, I hope, nothing to distress you; and be assured that if
a lively joy is not painted in my face, my heart is contented.
Something whispers to me not to depend too much on
the prospect that is opened before us, but I will not listen
to such a sinister voice. Observe how fast we move along
and how the clouds, which sometimes obscure and sometimes
rise above the dome of Mont Blanc, render this scene
of beauty still more interesting. Look also at the innumerable
fish that are swimming in the clear waters, where we
can distinguish every pebble that lies at the bottom. What a
divine day! How happy and serene all nature appears!’
Thus Elizabeth endeavoured to divert her thoughts and
mine from all reflection upon melancholy subjects. But her
temper was fluctuating; joy for a few instants shone in her
eyes, but it continually gave place to distraction and reverie.
The sun sank lower in the heavens; we passed the river
Drance and observed its path through the chasms of the
higher and the glens of the lower hills. The Alps here come
closer to the lake, and we approached the amphitheatre of
mountains which forms its eastern boundary. The spire of
Evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the
range of mountain above mountain by which it was overhung.
The wind, which had hitherto carried us along with
amazing rapidity, sank at sunset to a light breeze; the soft 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 239
air just ruffled the water and caused a pleasant motion
among the trees as we approached the shore, from which it
wafted the most delightful scent of flowers and hay. The sun
sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as I touched the
shore I felt those cares and fears revive which soon were to
clasp me and cling to me forever.
240 Frankenstein
Chapter 23
I
t was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for a short
time on the shore, enjoying the transitory light, and then
retired to the inn and contemplated the lovely scene of waters,
woods, and mountains, obscured in darkness, yet still
displaying their black outlines.
The wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with
great violence in the west. The moon had reached her summit
in the heavens and was beginning to descend; the
clouds swept across it swifter than the flight of the vulture
and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the scene of
the busy heavens, rendered still busier by the restless waves
that were beginning to rise. Suddenly a heavy storm of rain
descended.
I had been calm during the day, but so soon as night obscured
the shapes of objects, a thousand fears arose in my
mind. I was anxious and watchful, while my right hand
grasped a pistol which was hidden in my bosom; every
sound terrified me, but I resolved that I would sell my life
dearly and not shrink from the conflict until my own life or
that of my adversary was extinguished.
Elizabeth observed my agitation for some time in timid
and fearful silence, but there was something in my glance
which communicated terror to her, and trembling, she
asked, ‘What is it that agitates you, my dear Victor? What 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 241
is it you fear?’
‘Oh! Peace, peace, my love,’ replied I; ‘this night, and all
will be safe; but this night is dreadful, very dreadful.’
I passed an hour in this state of mind, when suddenly I
reflected how fearful the combat which I momentarily expected
would be to my wife, and I earnestly entreated her to
retire, resolving not to join her until I had obtained some
knowledge as to the situation of my enemy.
She left me, and I continued some time walking up and
down the passages of the house and inspecting every corner
that might afford a retreat to my adversary. But I discovered
no trace of him and was beginning to conjecture that some
fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the execution
of his menaces when suddenly I heard a shrill and dreadful
scream. It came from the room into which Elizabeth had
retired. As I heard it, the whole truth rushed into my mind,
my arms dropped, the motion of every muscle and fibre was
suspended; I could feel the blood trickling in my veins and
tingling in the extremities of my limbs. This state lasted but
for an instant; the scream was repeated, and I rushed into
the room.
Great God! Why did I not then expire! Why am I here to
relate the destruction of the best hope and the purest creature
on earth? She was there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown
across the bed, her head hanging down and her pale and
distorted features half covered by her hair. Everywhere I
turn I see the same figure— her bloodless arms and relaxed
form flung by the murderer on its bridal bier. Could I behold
this and live? Alas! Life is obstinate and clings closest 
242 Frankenstein
where it is most hated. For a moment only did I lose recollection;
I fell senseless on the ground.
When I recovered I found myself surrounded by the people
of the inn; their countenances expressed a breathless
terror, but the horror of others appeared only as a mockery,
a shadow of the feelings that oppressed me. I escaped from
them to the room where lay the body of Elizabeth, my love,
my wife, so lately living, so dear, so worthy. She had been
moved from the posture in which I had first beheld her, and
now, as she lay, her head upon her arm and a handkerchief
thrown across her face and neck, I might have supposed her
asleep. I rushed towards her and embraced her with ardour,
but the deadly languor and coldness of the limbs told me
that what I now held in my arms had ceased to be the Elizabeth
whom I had loved and cherished. The murderous mark
of the fiend’s grasp was on her neck, and the breath had
ceased to issue from her lips.
While I still hung over her in the agony of despair, I happened
to look up. The windows of the room had before been
darkened, and I felt a kind of panic on seeing the pale yellow
light of the moon illuminate the chamber. The shutters had
been thrown back, and with a sensation of horror not to be
described, I saw at the open window a figure the most hideous
and abhorred. A grin was on the face of the monster;
he seemed to jeer, as with his fiendish finger he pointed towards
the corpse of my wife. I rushed towards the window,
and drawing a pistol from my bosom, fired; but he eluded
me, leaped from his station, and running with the swiftness
of lightning, plunged into the lake.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 243
The report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. I
pointed to the spot where he had disappeared, and we followed
the track with boats; nets were cast, but in vain. After
passing several hours, we returned hopeless, most of my
companions believing it to have been a form conjured up
by my fancy. After having landed, they proceeded to search
the country, parties going in different directions among the
woods and vines.
I attempted to accompany them and proceeded a short
distance from the house, but my head whirled round, my
steps were like those of a drunken man, I fell at last in a
state of utter exhaustion; a film covered my eyes, and my
skin was parched with the heat of fever. In this state I was
carried back and placed on a bed, hardly conscious of what
had happened; my eyes wandered round the room as if to
seek something that I had lost.
After an interval I arose, and as if by instinct, crawled into
the room where the corpse of my beloved lay. There were
women weeping around; I hung over it and joined my sad
tears to theirs; all this time no distinct idea presented itself
to my mind, but my thoughts rambled to various subjects,
reflecting confusedly on my misfortunes and their cause. I
was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and horror. The death
of William, the execution of Justine, the murder of Clerval,
and lastly of my wife; even at that moment I knew not that
my only remaining friends were safe from the malignity of
the fiend; my father even now might be writhing under his
grasp, and Ernest might be dead at his feet. This idea made
me shudder and recalled me to action. I started up and re-
244 Frankenstein
solved to return to Geneva with all possible speed.
There were no horses to be procured, and I must return
by the lake; but the wind was unfavourable, and the rain fell
in torrents. However, it was hardly morning, and I might
reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and
took an oar myself, for I had always experienced relief from
mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery
I now felt, and the excess of agitation that I endured
rendered me incapable of any exertion. I threw down the
oar, and leaning my head upon my hands, gave way to every
gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up, I saw scenes which
were familiar to me in my happier time and which I had
contemplated but the day before in the company of her who
was now but a shadow and a recollection. Tears streamed
from my eyes. The rain had ceased for a moment, and I saw
the fish play in the waters as they had done a few hours before;
they had then been observed by Elizabeth. Nothing is
so painful to the human mind as a great and sudden change.
The sun might shine or the clouds might lower, but nothing
could appear to me as it had done the day before. A fiend
had snatched from me every hope of future happiness; no
creature had ever been so miserable as I was; so frightful an
event is single in the history of man.
But why should I dwell upon the incidents that followed
this last overwhelming event? Mine has been a tale of horrors;
I have reached their acme, and what I must now relate
can but be tedious to you. Know that, one by one, my friends
were snatched away; I was left desolate. My own strength is
exhausted, and I must tell, in a few words, what remains of 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 245
my hideous narration.
I arrived at Geneva. My father and Ernest yet lived, but
the former sunk under the tidings that I bore. I see him now,
excellent and venerable old man! His eyes wandered in vacancy,
for they had lost their charm and their delight—his
Elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he doted on with
all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of life,
having few affections, clings more earnestly to those that
remain. Cursed, cursed be the fiend that brought misery on
his grey hairs and doomed him to waste in wretchedness!
He could not live under the horrors that were accumulated
around him; the springs of existence suddenly gave way; he
was unable to rise from his bed, and in a few days he died
in my arms.
What then became of me? I know not; I lost sensation,
and chains and darkness were the only objects that pressed
upon me. Sometimes, indeed, I dreamt that I wandered in
flowery meadows and pleasant vales with the friends of my
youth, but I awoke and found myself in a dungeon. Melancholy
followed, but by degrees I gained a clear conception
of my miseries and situation and was then released from
my prison. For they had called me mad, and during many
months, as I understood, a solitary cell had been my habitation.
Liberty, however, had been a useless gift to me, had I not,
as I awakened to reason, at the same time awakened to revenge.
As the memory of past misfortunes pressed upon me,
I began to reflect on their cause—the monster whom I had
created, the miserable daemon whom I had sent abroad into 
246 Frankenstein
the world for my destruction. I was possessed by a maddening
rage when I thought of him, and desired and ardently
prayed that I might have him within my grasp to wreak a
great and signal revenge on his cursed head.
Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; I
began to reflect on the best means of securing him; and for
this purpose, about a month after my release, I repaired to
a criminal judge in the town and told him that I had an accusation
to make, that I knew the destroyer of my family,
and that I required him to exert his whole authority for the
apprehension of the murderer.
The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness.
‘Be assured, sir,’ said he, ‘no pains or exertions on my
part shall be spared to discover the villain.’
‘I thank you,’ replied I; ‘listen, therefore, to the deposition
that I have to make. It is indeed a tale so strange that
I should fear you would not credit it were there not something
in truth which, however wonderful, forces conviction.
The story is too connected to be mistaken for a dream, and
I have no motive for falsehood.’ My manner as I thus addressed
him was impressive but calm; I had formed in my
own heart a resolution to pursue my destroyer to death, and
this purpose quieted my agony and for an interval reconciled
me to life. I now related my history briefly but with
firmness and precision, marking the dates with accuracy
and never deviating into invective or exclamation.
The magistrate appeared at first perfectly incredulous,
but as I continued he became more attentive and interested;
I saw him sometimes shudder with horror; at others a 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 247
lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was painted on
his countenance.
When I had concluded my narration I said, ‘This is the
being whom I accuse and for whose seizure and punishment
I call upon you to exert your whole power. It is your
duty as a magistrate, and I believe and hope that your feelings
as a man will not revolt from the execution of those
functions on this occasion.’
This address caused a considerable change in the physiognomy
of my own auditor. He had heard my story with that
half kind of belief that is given to a tale of spirits and supernatural
events; but when he was called upon to act officially
in consequence, the whole tide of his incredulity returned.
He, however, answered mildly, ‘I would willingly afford you
every aid in your pursuit, but the creature of whom you
speak appears to have powers which would put all my exertions
to defiance. Who can follow an animal which can
traverse the sea of ice and inhabit caves and dens where no
man would venture to intrude? Besides, some months have
elapsed since the commission of his crimes, and no one can
conjecture to what place he has wandered or what region he
may now inhabit.’
‘I do not doubt that he hovers near the spot which I inhabit,
and if he has indeed taken refuge in the Alps, he may
be hunted like the chamois and destroyed as a beast of prey.
But I perceive your thoughts; you do not credit my narrative
and do not intend to pursue my enemy with the punishment
which is his desert.’
As I spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes; the magistrate was 
248 Frankenstein
intimidated. ‘You are mistaken,’ said he. ‘I will exert myself,
and if it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured that
he shall suffer punishment proportionate to his crimes. But
I fear, from what you have yourself described to be his properties,
that this will prove impracticable; and thus, while
every proper measure is pursued, you should make up your
mind to disappointment.’
‘That cannot be; but all that I can say will be of little avail.
My revenge is of no moment to you; yet, while I allow it to
be a vice, I confess that it is the devouring and only passion
of my soul. My rage is unspeakable when I reflect that the
murderer, whom I have turned loose upon society, still exists.
You refuse my just demand; I have but one resource,
and I devote myself, either in my life or death, to his destruction.’
I trembled with excess of agitation as I said this; there
was a frenzy in my manner, and something, I doubt not, of
that haughty fierceness which the martyrs of old are said to
have possessed. But to a Genevan magistrate, whose mind
was occupied by far other ideas than those of devotion and
heroism, this elevation of mind had much the appearance
of madness. He endeavoured to soothe me as a nurse does a
child and reverted to my tale as the effects of delirium.
‘Man,’ I cried, ‘how ignorant art thou in thy pride of wisdom!
Cease; you know not what it is you say.’
I broke from the house angry and disturbed and retired
to meditate on some other mode of action.
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 249
Chapter 24
My present situation was one in which all voluntary
thought was swallowed up and lost. I was hurried
away by fury; revenge alone endowed me with strength and
composure; it moulded my feelings and allowed me to be
calculating and calm at periods when otherwise delirium
or death would have been my portion.
My first resolution was to quit Geneva forever; my country,
which, when I was happy and beloved, was dear to me,
now, in my adversity, became hateful. I provided myself
with a sum of money, together with a few jewels which had
belonged to my mother, and departed.
And now my wanderings began which are to cease but
with life. I have traversed a vast portion of the earth and
have endured all the hardships which travellers in deserts
and barbarous countries are wont to meet. How I have
lived I hardly know; many times have I stretched my failing
limbs upon the sandy plain and prayed for death. But
revenge kept me alive; I dared not die and leave my adversary
in being.
When I quitted Geneva my first labour was to gain
some clue by which I might trace the steps of my fiendish
enemy. But my plan was unsettled, and I wandered many
hours round the confines of the town, uncertain what path
I should pursue. As night approached I found myself at the 
250 Frankenstein
entrance of the cemetery where William, Elizabeth, and my
father reposed. I entered it and approached the tomb which
marked their graves. Everything was silent except the leaves
of the trees, which were gently agitated by the wind; the
night was nearly dark, and the scene would have been solemn
and affecting even to an uninterested observer. The
spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to cast a
shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of the
mourner.
The deep grief which this scene had at first excited quickly
gave way to rage and despair. They were dead, and I lived;
their murderer also lived, and to destroy him I must drag
out my weary existence. I knelt on the grass and kissed the
earth and with quivering lips exclaimed, ‘By the sacred
earth on which I kneel, by the shades that wander near me,
by the deep and eternal grief that I feel, I swear; and by thee,
O Night, and the spirits that preside over thee, to pursue the
daemon who caused this misery, until he or I shall perish
in mortal conflict. For this purpose I will preserve my life;
to execute this dear revenge will I again behold the sun and
tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should
vanish from my eyes forever. And I call on you, spirits of
the dead, and on you, wandering ministers of vengeance, to
aid and conduct me in my work. Let the cursed and hellish
monster drink deep of agony; let him feel the despair that
now torments me.’
I had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe
which almost assured me that the shades of my murdered
friends heard and approved my devotion, but the furies pos-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 251
sessed me as I concluded, and rage choked my utterance.
I was answered through the stillness of night by a loud
and fiendish laugh. It rang on my ears long and heavily; the
mountains re-echoed it, and I felt as if all hell surrounded
me with mockery and laughter. Surely in that moment
I should have been possessed by frenzy and have destroyed
my miserable existence but that my vow was heard and
that I was reserved for vengeance. The laughter died away,
when a well-known and abhorred voice, apparently close
to my ear, addressed me in an audible whisper, ‘I am satisfied,
miserable wretch! You have determined to live, and I
am satisfied.’
I darted towards the spot from which the sound proceeded,
but the devil eluded my grasp. Suddenly the broad
disk of the moon arose and shone full upon his ghastly and
distorted shape as he fled with more than mortal speed.
I pursued him, and for many months this has been my
task. Guided by a slight clue, I followed the windings of the
Rhone, but vainly. The blue Mediterranean appeared, and
by a strange chance, I saw the fiend enter by night and hide
himself in a vessel bound for the Black Sea. I took my passage
in the same ship, but he escaped, I know not how.
Amidst the wilds of Tartary and Russia, although he still
evaded me, I have ever followed in his track. Sometimes the
peasants, scared by this horrid apparition, informed me of
his path; sometimes he himself, who feared that if I lost all
trace of him I should despair and die, left some mark to
guide me. The snows descended on my head, and I saw the
print of his huge step on the white plain. To you first en-
252 Frankenstein
tering on life, to whom care is new and agony unknown,
how can you understand what I have felt and still feel? Cold,
want, and fatigue were the least pains which I was destined
to endure; I was cursed by some devil and carried about
with me my eternal hell; yet still a spirit of good followed
and directed my steps and when I most murmured would
suddenly extricate me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties.
Sometimes, when nature, overcome by hunger,
sank under the exhaustion, a repast was prepared for me
in the desert that restored and inspirited me. The fare was,
indeed, coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate, but
I will not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that I
had invoked to aid me. Often, when all was dry, the heavens
cloudless, and I was parched by thirst, a slight cloud
would bedim the sky, shed the few drops that revived me,
and vanish.
I followed, when I could, the courses of the rivers; but
the daemon generally avoided these, as it was here that the
population of the country chiefly collected. In other places
human beings were seldom seen, and I generally subsisted
on the wild animals that crossed my path. I had money with
me and gained the friendship of the villagers by distributing
it; or I brought with me some food that I had killed, which,
after taking a small part, I always presented to those who
had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking.
My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and
it was during sleep alone that I could taste joy. O blessed
sleep! Often, when most miserable, I sank to repose, and my
dreams lulled me even to rapture. The spirits that guarded 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 253
me had provided these moments, or rather hours, of happiness
that I might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage.
Deprived of this respite, I should have sunk under my hardships.
During the day I was sustained and inspirited by the
hope of night, for in sleep I saw my friends, my wife, and my
beloved country; again I saw the benevolent countenance
of my father, heard the silver tones of my Elizabeth’s voice,
and beheld Clerval enjoying health and youth. Often, when
wearied by a toilsome march, I persuaded myself that I was
dreaming until night should come and that I should then
enjoy reality in the arms of my dearest friends. What agonizing
fondness did I feel for them! How did I cling to their
dear forms, as sometimes they haunted even my waking
hours, and persuade myself that they still lived! At such moments
vengeance, that burned within me, died in my heart,
and I pursued my path towards the destruction of the daemon
more as a task enjoined by heaven, as the mechanical
impulse of some power of which I was unconscious, than as
the ardent desire of my soul.
What his feelings were whom I pursued I cannot know.
Sometimes, indeed, he left marks in writing on the barks of
the trees or cut in stone that guided me and instigated my
fury. ‘My reign is not yet over’— these words were legible
in one of these inscriptions— ‘you live, and my power is
complete. Follow me; I seek the everlasting ices of the north,
where you will feel the misery of cold and frost, to which I
am impassive. You will find near this place, if you follow
not too tardily, a dead hare; eat and be refreshed. Come on,
my enemy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many 
254 Frankenstein
hard and miserable hours must you endure until that period
shall arrive.’
Scoffing devil! Again do I vow vengeance; again do I devote
thee, miserable fiend, to torture and death. Never will
I give up my search until he or I perish; and then with what
ecstasy shall I join my Elizabeth and my departed friends,
who even now prepare for me the reward of my tedious toil
and horrible pilgrimage!
As I still pursued my journey to the northward, the
snows thickened and the cold increased in a degree almost
too severe to support. The peasants were shut up in their
hovels, and only a few of the most hardy ventured forth to
seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their
hiding-places to seek for prey. The rivers were covered with
ice, and no fish could be procured; and thus I was cut off
from my chief article of maintenance.
The triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of
my labours. One inscription that he left was in these words:
‘Prepare! Your toils only begin; wrap yourself in furs and
provide food, for we shall soon enter upon a journey where
your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting hatred.’
My courage and perseverance were invigorated by these
scoffing words; I resolved not to fail in my purpose, and
calling on heaven to support me, I continued with unabated
fervour to traverse immense deserts, until the ocean appeared
at a distance and formed the utmost boundary of
the horizon. Oh! How unlike it was to the blue seasons of
the south! Covered with ice, it was only to be distinguished
from land by its superior wildness and ruggedness. The 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 255
Greeks wept for joy when they beheld the Mediterranean
from the hills of Asia, and hailed with rapture the boundary
of their toils. I did not weep, but I knelt down and with
a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me
in safety to the place where I hoped, notwithstanding my
adversary’s gibe, to meet and grapple with him.
Some weeks before this period I had procured a sledge
and dogs and thus traversed the snows with inconceivable
speed. I know not whether the fiend possessed the same advantages,
but I found that, as before I had daily lost ground
in the pursuit, I now gained on him, so much so that when
I first saw the ocean he was but one day’s journey in advance,
and I hoped to intercept him before he should reach
the beach. With new courage, therefore, I pressed on, and
in two days arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore. I
inquired of the inhabitants concerning the fiend and gained
accurate information. A gigantic monster, they said, had
arrived the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols,
putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage
through fear of his terrific appearance. He had carried off
their store of winter food, and placing it in a sledge, to draw
which he had seized on a numerous drove of trained dogs,
he had harnessed them, and the same night, to the joy of the
horror-struck villagers, had pursued his journey across the
sea in a direction that led to no land; and they conjectured
that he must speedily be destroyed by the breaking of the
ice or frozen by the eternal frosts.
On hearing this information I suffered a temporary
access of despair. He had escaped me, and I must com-
256 Frankenstein
mence a destructive and almost endless journey across the
mountainous ices of the ocean, amidst cold that few of the
inhabitants could long endure and which I, the native of a
genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive. Yet at
the idea that the fiend should live and be triumphant, my
rage and vengeance returned, and like a mighty tide, overwhelmed
every other feeling. After a slight repose, during
which the spirits of the dead hovered round and instigated
me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my journey.
I exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities
of the frozen ocean, and purchasing a plentiful
stock of provisions, I departed from land.
I cannot guess how many days have passed since then,
but I have endured misery which nothing but the eternal
sentiment of a just retribution burning within my heart
could have enabled me to support. Immense and rugged
mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and I often
heard the thunder of the ground sea, which threatened my
destruction. But again the frost came and made the paths
of the sea secure.
By the quantity of provision which I had consumed, I
should guess that I had passed three weeks in this journey;
and the continual protraction of hope, returning back upon
the heart, often wrung bitter drops of despondency and grief
from my eyes. Despair had indeed almost secured her prey,
and I should soon have sunk beneath this misery. Once, after
the poor animals that conveyed me had with incredible
toil gained the summit of a sloping ice mountain, and one,
sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the expanse be-
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 257
fore me with anguish, when suddenly my eye caught a dark
speck upon the dusky plain. I strained my sight to discover
what it could be and uttered a wild cry of ecstasy when I
distinguished a sledge and the distorted proportions of a
well-known form within. Oh! With what a burning gush
did hope revisit my heart! Warm tears filled my eyes, which
I hastily wiped away, that they might not intercept the view
I had of the daemon; but still my sight was dimmed by the
burning drops, until, giving way to the emotions that oppressed
me, I wept aloud.
But this was not the time for delay; I disencumbered the
dogs of their dead companion, gave them a plentiful portion
of food, and after an hour’s rest, which was absolutely
necessary, and yet which was bitterly irksome to me, I continued
my route. The sledge was still visible, nor did I again
lose sight of it except at the moments when for a short time
some ice-rock concealed it with its intervening crags. I indeed
perceptibly gained on it, and when, after nearly two
days’ journey, I beheld my enemy at no more than a mile
distant, my heart bounded within me.
But now, when I appeared almost within grasp of my foe,
my hopes were suddenly extinguished, and I lost all trace
of him more utterly than I had ever done before. A ground
sea was heard; the thunder of its progress, as the waters
rolled and swelled beneath me, became every moment
more ominous and terrific. I pressed on, but in vain. The
wind arose; the sea roared; and, as with the mighty shock
of an earthquake, it split and cracked with a tremendous
and overwhelming sound. The work was soon finished; in 
258 Frankenstein
a few minutes a tumultuous sea rolled between me and my
enemy, and I was left drifting on a scattered piece of ice that
was continually lessening and thus preparing for me a hideous
death.
In this manner many appalling hours passed; several
of my dogs died, and I myself was about to sink under the
accumulation of distress when I saw your vessel riding at
anchor and holding forth to me hopes of succour and life. I
had no conception that vessels ever came so far north and
was astounded at the sight. I quickly destroyed part of my
sledge to construct oars, and by these means was enabled,
with infinite fatigue, to move my ice raft in the direction
of your ship. I had determined, if you were going southwards,
still to trust myself to the mercy of the seas rather
than abandon my purpose. I hoped to induce you to grant
me a boat with which I could pursue my enemy. But your
direction was northwards. You took me on board when my
vigour was exhausted, and I should soon have sunk under
my multiplied hardships into a death which I still dread, for
my task is unfulfilled.
Oh! When will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to
the daemon, allow me the rest I so much desire; or must I
die, and he yet live? If I do, swear to me, Walton, that he shall
not escape, that you will seek him and satisfy my vengeance
in his death. And do I dare to ask of you to undertake my
pilgrimage, to endure the hardships that I have undergone?
No; I am not so selfish. Yet, when I am dead, if he should
appear, if the ministers of vengeance should conduct him
to you, swear that he shall not live— swear that he shall not 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 259
triumph over my accumulated woes and survive to add to
the list of his dark crimes. He is eloquent and persuasive,
and once his words had even power over my heart; but trust
him not. His soul is as hellish as his form, full of treachery
and fiendlike malice. Hear him not; call on the names of
William, Justine, Clerval, Elizabeth, my father, and of the
wretched Victor, and thrust your sword into his heart. I will
hover near and direct the steel aright.
Walton, in continuation.
August 26th, 17—
You have read this strange and terrific story, Margaret;
and do you not feel your blood congeal with horror, like
that which even now curdles mine? Sometimes, seized with
sudden agony, he could not continue his tale; at others, his
voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with difficulty the words
so replete with anguish. His fine and lovely eyes were now
lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow
and quenched in infinite wretchedness. Sometimes he
commanded his countenance and tones and related the
most horrible incidents with a tranquil voice, suppressing
every mark of agitation; then, like a volcano bursting
forth, his face would suddenly change to an expression of
the wildest rage as he shrieked out imprecations on his persecutor.
His tale is connected and told with an appearance of the
simplest truth, yet I own to you that the letters of Felix and
Safie, which he showed me, and the apparition of the monster
seen from our ship, brought to me a greater conviction
of the truth of his narrative than his asseverations, howev-
260 Frankenstein
er earnest and connected. Such a monster has, then, really
existence! I cannot doubt it, yet I am lost in surprise and
admiration. Sometimes I endeavoured to gain from Frankenstein
the particulars of his creature’s formation, but on
this point he was impenetrable.
‘Are you mad, my friend?’ said he. ‘Or whither does your
senseless curiosity lead you? Would you also create for yourself
and the world a demoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! Learn
my miseries and do not seek to increase your own.’
Frankenstein discovered that I made notes concerning
his history; he asked to see them and then himself corrected
and augmented them in many places, but principally in giving
the life and spirit to the conversations he held with his
enemy. ‘Since you have preserved my narration,’ said he, ‘I
would not that a mutilated one should go down to posterity.’
Thus has a week passed away, while I have listened to the
strangest tale that ever imagination formed. My thoughts
and every feeling of my soul have been drunk up by the
interest for my guest which this tale and his own elevated
and gentle manners have created. I wish to soothe him, yet
can I counsel one so infinitely miserable, so destitute of every
hope of consolation, to live? Oh, no! The only joy that
he can now know will be when he composes his shattered
spirit to peace and death. Yet he enjoys one comfort, the
offspring of solitude and delirium; he believes that when
in dreams he holds converse with his friends and derives
from that communion consolation for his miseries or excitements
to his vengeance, that they are not the creations 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 261
of his fancy, but the beings themselves who visit him from
the regions of a remote world. This faith gives a solemnity
to his reveries that render them to me almost as imposing
and interesting as truth.
Our conversations are not always confined to his own
history and misfortunes. On every point of general literature
he displays unbounded knowledge and a quick and
piercing apprehension. His eloquence is forcible and touching;
nor can I hear him, when he relates a pathetic incident
or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love, without
tears. What a glorious creature must he have been in the
days of his prosperity, when he is thus noble and godlike
in ruin! He seems to feel his own worth and the greatness
of his fall.
‘When younger,’ said he, ‘I believed myself destined for
some great enterprise. My feelings are profound, but I possessed
a coolness of judgment that fitted me for illustrious
achievements. This sentiment of the worth of my nature
supported me when others would have been oppressed, for
I deemed it criminal to throw away in useless grief those
talents that might be useful to my fellow creatures. When
I reflected on the work I had completed, no less a one than
the creation of a sensitive and rational animal, I could not
rank myself with the herd of common projectors. But this
thought, which supported me in the commencement of
my career, now serves only to plunge me lower in the dust.
All my speculations and hopes are as nothing, and like the
archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an
eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of 
262 Frankenstein
analysis and application were intense; by the union of these
qualities I conceived the idea and executed the creation of a
man. Even now I cannot recollect without passion my reveries
while the work was incomplete. I trod heaven in my
thoughts, now exulting in my powers, now burning with
the idea of their effects. From my infancy I was imbued
with high hopes and a lofty ambition; but how am I sunk!
Oh! My friend, if you had known me as I once was, you
would not recognize me in this state of degradation. Despondency
rarely visited my heart; a high destiny seemed to
bear me on, until I fell, never, never again to rise.’
Must I then lose this admirable being? I have longed for
a friend; I have sought one who would sympathize with and
love me. Behold, on these desert seas I have found such a
one, but I fear I have gained him only to know his value
and lose him. I would reconcile him to life, but he repulses
the idea.
‘I thank you, Walton,’ he said, ‘for your kind intentions
towards so miserable a wretch; but when you speak of new
ties and fresh affections, think you that any can replace
those who are gone? Can any man be to me as Clerval was,
or any woman another Elizabeth? Even where the affections
are not strongly moved by any superior excellence, the companions
of our childhood always possess a certain power
over our minds which hardly any later friend can obtain.
They know our infantine dispositions, which, however they
may be afterwards modified, are never eradicated; and they
can judge of our actions with more certain conclusions as to
the integrity of our motives. A sister or a brother can never, 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 263
unless indeed such symptoms have been shown early, suspect
the other of fraud or false dealing, when another friend,
however strongly he may be attached, may, in spite of himself,
be contemplated with suspicion. But I enjoyed friends,
dear not only through habit and association, but from their
own merits; and wherever I am, the soothing voice of my
Elizabeth and the conversation of Clerval will be ever whispered
in my ear. They are dead, and but one feeling in such
a solitude can persuade me to preserve my life. If I were
engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with
extensive utility to my fellow creatures, then could I live
to fulfil it. But such is not my destiny; I must pursue and
destroy the being to whom I gave existence; then my lot on
earth will be fulfilled and I may die.’
My beloved Sister, September 2nd
I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether
I am ever doomed to see again dear England and the
dearer friends that inhabit it. I am surrounded by mountains
of ice which admit of no escape and threaten every
moment to crush my vessel. The brave fellows whom I have
persuaded to be my companions look towards me for aid,
but I have none to bestow. There is something terribly appalling
in our situation, yet my courage and hopes do not
desert me. Yet it is terrible to reflect that the lives of all these
men are endangered through me. If we are lost, my mad
schemes are the cause.
And what, Margaret, will be the state of your mind? You
will not hear of my destruction, and you will anxiously
await my return. Years will pass, and you will have visit-
264 Frankenstein
ings of despair and yet be tortured by hope. Oh! My beloved
sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations
is, in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death. But
you have a husband and lovely children; you may be happy.
Heaven bless you and make you so!
My unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest
compassion. He endeavours to fill me with hope and talks
as if life were a possession which he valued. He reminds
me how often the same accidents have happened to other
navigators who have attempted this sea, and in spite of myself,
he fills me with cheerful auguries. Even the sailors feel
the power of his eloquence; when he speaks, they no longer
despair; he rouses their energies, and while they hear
his voice they believe these vast mountains of ice are molehills
which will vanish before the resolutions of man. These
feelings are transitory; each day of expectation delayed fills
them with fear, and I almost dread a mutiny caused by this
despair.
September 5th
A scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that,
although it is highly probable that these papers may never
reach you, yet I cannot forbear recording it.
We are still surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent
danger of being crushed in their conflict. The cold
is excessive, and many of my unfortunate comrades have
already found a grave amidst this scene of desolation. Frankenstein
has daily declined in health; a feverish fire still
glimmers in his eyes, but he is exhausted, and when suddenly
roused to any exertion, he speedily sinks again into 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 265
apparent lifelessness.
I mentioned in my last letter the fears I entertained of
a mutiny. This morning, as I sat watching the wan countenance
of my friend— his eyes half closed and his limbs
hanging listlessly— I was roused by half a dozen of the sailors,
who demanded admission into the cabin. They entered,
and their leader addressed me. He told me that he and his
companions had been chosen by the other sailors to come
in deputation to me to make me a requisition which, in justice,
I could not refuse. We were immured in ice and should
probably never escape, but they feared that if, as was possible,
the ice should dissipate and a free passage be opened,
I should be rash enough to continue my voyage and lead
them into fresh dangers, after they might happily have surmounted
this. They insisted, therefore, that I should engage
with a solemn promise that if the vessel should be freed I
would instantly direct my course southwards.
This speech troubled me. I had not despaired, nor had
I yet conceived the idea of returning if set free. Yet could I,
in justice, or even in possibility, refuse this demand? I hesitated
before I answered, when Frankenstein, who had at
first been silent, and indeed appeared hardly to have force
enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled,
and his cheeks flushed with momentary vigour. Turning towards
the men, he said, ‘What do you mean? What do you
demand of your captain? Are you, then, so easily turned
from your design? Did you not call this a glorious expedition?
And wherefore was it glorious? Not because the way
was smooth and placid as a southern sea, but because it was 
266 Frankenstein
full of dangers and terror, because at every new incident
your fortitude was to be called forth and your courage exhibited,
because danger and death surrounded it, and these
you were to brave and overcome. For this was it a glorious,
for this was it an honourable undertaking. You were hereafter
to be hailed as the benefactors of your species, your
names adored as belonging to brave men who encountered
death for honour and the benefit of mankind. And now, behold,
with the first imagination of danger, or, if you will, the
first mighty and terrific trial of your courage, you shrink
away and are content to be handed down as men who had
not strength enough to endure cold and peril; and so, poor
souls, they were chilly and returned to their warm firesides.
Why, that requires not this preparation; ye need not have
come thus far and dragged your captain to the shame of a
defeat merely to prove yourselves cowards. Oh! Be men, or
be more than men. Be steady to your purposes and firm as
a rock. This ice is not made of such stuff as your hearts may
be; it is mutable and cannot withstand you if you say that it
shall not. Do not return to your families with the stigma of
disgrace marked on your brows. Return as heroes who have
fought and conquered and who know not what it is to turn
their backs on the foe.’
He spoke this with a voice so modulated to the different
feelings expressed in his speech, with an eye so full of lofty
design and heroism, that can you wonder that these men
were moved? They looked at one another and were unable
to reply. I spoke; I told them to retire and consider of what
had been said, that I would not lead them farther north if 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 267
they strenuously desired the contrary, but that I hoped that,
with reflection, their courage would return.
They retired and I turned towards my friend, but he was
sunk in languor and almost deprived of life.
How all this will terminate, I know not, but I had rather
die than return shamefully, my purpose unfulfilled. Yet I
fear such will be my fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of
glory and honour, can never willingly continue to endure
their present hardships.
September 7th
The die is cast; I have consented to return if we are not
destroyed. Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and
indecision; I come back ignorant and disappointed. It requires
more philosophy than I possess to bear this injustice
with patience.
September 12th
It is past; I am returning to England. I have lost my hopes
of utility and glory; I have lost my friend. But I will endeavour
to detail these bitter circumstances to you, my dear
sister; and while I am wafted towards England and towards
you, I will not despond.
September 9th, the ice began to move, and roarings like
thunder were heard at a distance as the islands split and
cracked in every direction. We were in the most imminent
peril, but as we could only remain passive, my chief attention
was occupied by my unfortunate guest whose illness
increased in such a degree that he was entirely confined
to his bed. The ice cracked behind us and was driven with
force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and 
268 Frankenstein
on the 11th the passage towards the south became perfectly
free. When the sailors saw this and that their return to
their native country was apparently assured, a shout of tumultuous
joy broke from them, loud and long-continued.
Frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked the cause
of the tumult. ‘They shout,’ I said, ‘because they will soon
return to England.’
‘Do you, then, really return?’
‘Alas! Yes; I cannot withstand their demands. I cannot
lead them unwillingly to danger, and I must return.’
‘Do so, if you will; but I will not. You may give up your
purpose, but mine is assigned to me by heaven, and I dare
not. I am weak, but surely the spirits who assist my vengeance
will endow me with sufficient strength.’ Saying this,
he endeavoured to spring from the bed, but the exertion
was too great for him; he fell back and fainted.
It was long before he was restored, and I often thought
that life was entirely extinct. At length he opened his eyes;
he breathed with difficulty and was unable to speak. The
surgeon gave him a composing draught and ordered us to
leave him undisturbed. In the meantime he told me that my
friend had certainly not many hours to live.
His sentence was pronounced, and I could only grieve
and be patient. I sat by his bed, watching him; his eyes were
closed, and I thought he slept; but presently he called to me
in a feeble voice, and bidding me come near, said, ‘Alas! The
strength I relied on is gone; I feel that I shall soon die, and
he, my enemy and persecutor, may still be in being. Think
not, Walton, that in the last moments of my existence I feel 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 269
that burning hatred and ardent desire of revenge I once expressed;
but I feel myself justified in desiring the death of
my adversary. During these last days I have been occupied
in examining my past conduct; nor do I find it blamable.
In a fit of enthusiastic madness I created a rational creature
and was bound towards him to assure, as far as was in
my power, his happiness and well-being. This was my duty,
but there was another still paramount to that. My duties
towards the beings of my own species had greater claims
to my attention because they included a greater proportion
of happiness or misery. Urged by this view, I refused, and
I did right in refusing, to create a companion for the first
creature. He showed unparalleled malignity and selfishness
in evil; he destroyed my friends; he devoted to destruction
beings who possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and
wisdom; nor do I know where this thirst for vengeance may
end. Miserable himself that he may render no other wretched,
he ought to die. The task of his destruction was mine,
but I have failed. When actuated by selfish and vicious motives,
I asked you to undertake my unfinished work, and I
renew this request now, when I am only induced by reason
and virtue.
‘Yet I cannot ask you to renounce your country and
friends to fulfil this task; and now that you are returning
to England, you will have little chance of meeting with him.
But the consideration of these points, and the well balancing
of what you may esteem your duties, I leave to you; my
judgment and ideas are already disturbed by the near approach
of death. I dare not ask you to do what I think right, 
270 Frankenstein
for I may still be misled by passion.
‘That he should live to be an instrument of mischief disturbs
me; in other respects, this hour, when I momentarily
expect my release, is the only happy one which I have enjoyed
for several years. The forms of the beloved dead flit
before me, and I hasten to their arms. Farewell, Walton!
Seek happiness in tranquillity and avoid ambition, even if it
be only the apparently innocent one of distinguishing yourself
in science and discoveries. Yet why do I say this? I have
myself been blasted in these hopes, yet another may succeed.’
His voice became fainter as he spoke, and at length, exhausted
by his effort, he sank into silence. About half an
hour afterwards he attempted again to speak but was unable;
he pressed my hand feebly, and his eyes closed forever,
while the irradiation of a gentle smile passed away from his
lips.
Margaret, what comment can I make on the untimely
extinction of this glorious spirit? What can I say that will
enable you to understand the depth of my sorrow? All that
I should express would be inadequate and feeble. My tears
flow; my mind is overshadowed by a cloud of disappointment.
But I journey towards England, and I may there find
consolation.
I am interrupted. What do these sounds portend? It is
midnight; the breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck
scarcely stir. Again there is a sound as of a human voice,
but hoarser; it comes from the cabin where the remains of
Frankenstein still lie. I must arise and examine. Good night, 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 271
my sister.
Great God! what a scene has just taken place! I am yet
dizzy with the remembrance of it. I hardly know whether
I shall have the power to detail it; yet the tale which I have
recorded would be incomplete without this final and wonderful
catastrophe.
I entered the cabin where lay the remains of my ill-fated
and admirable friend. Over him hung a form which I cannot
find words to describe—gigantic in stature, yet uncouth
and distorted in its proportions. As he hung over the coffin,
his face was concealed by long locks of ragged hair; but
one vast hand was extended, in colour and apparent texture
like that of a mummy. When he heard the sound of my approach,
he ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror
and sprung towards the window. Never did I behold a vision
so horrible as his face, of such loathsome yet appalling
hideousness. I shut my eyes involuntarily and endeavoured
to recollect what were my duties with regard to this destroyer.
I called on him to stay.
He paused, looking on me with wonder, and again turning
towards the lifeless form of his creator, he seemed to
forget my presence, and every feature and gesture seemed
instigated by the wildest rage of some uncontrollable passion.
‘That is also my victim!’ he exclaimed. ‘In his murder my
crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being
is wound to its close! Oh, Frankenstein! Generous and selfdevoted
being! What does it avail that I now ask thee to
pardon me? I, who irretrievably destroyed thee by destroy-
272 Frankenstein
ing all thou lovedst. Alas! He is cold, he cannot answer me.’
His voice seemed suffocated, and my first impulses,
which had suggested to me the duty of obeying the dying
request of my friend in destroying his enemy, were now
suspended by a mixture of curiosity and compassion. I approached
this tremendous being; I dared not again raise my
eyes to his face, there was something so scaring and unearthly
in his ugliness. I attempted to speak, but the words
died away on my lips. The monster continued to utter wild
and incoherent self-reproaches. At length I gathered resolution
to address him in a pause of the tempest of his passion.
‘Your repentance,’ I said, ‘is now superfluous. If you had listened
to the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of
remorse before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to
this extremity, Frankenstein would yet have lived.’
‘And do you dream?’ said the daemon. ‘Do you think that
I was then dead to agony and remorse? He,’ he continued,
pointing to the corpse, ‘he suffered not in the consummation
of the deed. Oh! Not the ten-thousandth portion of
the anguish that was mine during the lingering detail of
its execution. A frightful selfishness hurried me on, while
my heart was poisoned with remorse. Think you that the
groans of Clerval were music to my ears? My heart was
fashioned to be susceptible of love and sympathy, and when
wrenched by misery to vice and hatred, it did not endure
the violence of the change without torture such as you cannot
even imagine.
‘After the murder of Clerval I returned to Switzerland,
heart-broken and overcome. I pitied Frankenstein; my pity 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 273
amounted to horror; I abhorred myself. But when I discovered
that he, the author at once of my existence and of its
unspeakable torments, dared to hope for happiness, that
while he accumulated wretchedness and despair upon me
he sought his own enjoyment in feelings and passions from
the indulgence of which I was forever barred, then impotent
envy and bitter indignation filled me with an insatiable
thirst for vengeance. I recollected my threat and resolved
that it should be accomplished. I knew that I was preparing
for myself a deadly torture, but I was the slave, not the master,
of an impulse which I detested yet could not disobey.
Yet when she died! Nay, then I was not miserable. I had cast
off all feeling, subdued all anguish, to riot in the excess of
my despair. Evil thenceforth became my good. Urged thus
far, I had no choice but to adapt my nature to an element
which I had willingly chosen. The completion of my demoniacal
design became an insatiable passion. And now it is
ended; there is my last victim!’
I was at first touched by the expressions of his misery;
yet, when I called to mind what Frankenstein had said of
his powers of eloquence and persuasion, and when I again
cast my eyes on the lifeless form of my friend, indignation
was rekindled within me. ‘Wretch!’ I said. ‘It is well that you
come here to whine over the desolation that you have made.
You throw a torch into a pile of buildings, and when they
are consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall.
Hypocritical fiend! If he whom you mourn still lived, still
would he be the object, again would he become the prey, of
your accursed vengeance. It is not pity that you feel; you 
274 Frankenstein
lament only because the victim of your malignity is withdrawn
from your power.’
‘Oh, it is not thus—not thus,’ interrupted the being. ‘Yet
such must be the impression conveyed to you by what appears
to be the purport of my actions. Yet I seek not a fellow
feeling in my misery. No sympathy may I ever find. When I
first sought it, it was the love of virtue, the feelings of happiness
and affection with which my whole being overflowed,
that I wished to be participated. But now that virtue has
become to me a shadow, and that happiness and affection
are turned into bitter and loathing despair, in what should
I seek for sympathy? I am content to suffer alone while
my sufferings shall endure; when I die, I am well satisfied
that abhorrence and opprobrium should load my memory.
Once my fancy was soothed with dreams of virtue, of fame,
and of enjoyment. Once I falsely hoped to meet with beings
who, pardoning my outward form, would love me for
the excellent qualities which I was capable of unfolding. I
was nourished with high thoughts of honour and devotion.
But now crime has degraded me beneath the meanest animal.
No guilt, no mischief, no malignity, no misery, can be
found comparable to mine. When I run over the frightful
catalogue of my sins, I cannot believe that I am the same
creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and
transcendent visions of the beauty and the majesty of goodness.
But it is even so; the fallen angel becomes a malignant
devil. Yet even that enemy of God and man had friends and
associates in his desolation; I am alone.
‘You, who call Frankenstein your friend, seem to have 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 275
a knowledge of my crimes and his misfortunes. But in the
detail which he gave you of them he could not sum up the
hours and months of misery which I endured wasting in
impotent passions. For while I destroyed his hopes, I did
not satisfy my own desires. They were forever ardent and
craving; still I desired love and fellowship, and I was still
spurned. Was there no injustice in this? Am I to be thought
the only criminal, when all humankind sinned against me?
Why do you not hate Felix, who drove his friend from his
door with contumely? Why do you not execrate the rustic
who sought to destroy the saviour of his child? Nay, these
are virtuous and immaculate beings! I, the miserable and
the abandoned, am an abortion, to be spurned at, and
kicked, and trampled on. Even now my blood boils at the
recollection of this injustice.
‘But it is true that I am a wretch. I have murdered the
lovely and the helpless; I have strangled the innocent as they
slept and grasped to death his throat who never injured me
or any other living thing. I have devoted my creator, the
select specimen of all that is worthy of love and admiration
among men, to misery; I have pursued him even to that
irremediable ruin. There he lies, white and cold in death.
You hate me, but your abhorrence cannot equal that with
which I regard myself. I look on the hands which executed
the deed; I think on the heart in which the imagination of it
was conceived and long for the moment when these hands
will meet my eyes, when that imagination will haunt my
thoughts no more.
‘Fear not that I shall be the instrument of future mischief. 
276 Frankenstein
My work is nearly complete. Neither yours nor any man’s
death is needed to consummate the series of my being and
accomplish that which must be done, but it requires my
own. Do not think that I shall be slow to perform this sacrifice.
I shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which brought me
thither and shall seek the most northern extremity of the
globe; I shall collect my funeral pile and consume to ashes
this miserable frame, that its remains may afford no light to
any curious and unhallowed wretch who would create such
another as I have been. I shall die. I shall no longer feel the
agonies which now consume me or be the prey of feelings
unsatisfied, yet unquenched. He is dead who called me into
being; and when I shall be no more, the very remembrance
of us both will speedily vanish. I shall no longer see the sun
or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks. Light, feeling,
and sense will pass away; and in this condition must I find
my happiness. Some years ago, when the images which this
world affords first opened upon me, when I felt the cheering
warmth of summer and heard the rustling of the leaves and
the warbling of the birds, and these were all to me, I should
have wept to die; now it is my only consolation. Polluted by
crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can I find
rest but in death?
‘Farewell! I leave you, and in you the last of humankind
whom these eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein!
If thou wert yet alive and yet cherished a desire of revenge
against me, it would be better satiated in my life than in my
destruction. But it was not so; thou didst seek my extinction,
that I might not cause greater wretchedness; and if yet, 
Free eBooks at Planet eBook.com 277
in some mode unknown to me, thou hadst not ceased to
think and feel, thou wouldst not desire against me a vengeance
greater than that which I feel. Blasted as thou wert,
my agony was still superior to thine, for the bitter sting of
remorse will not cease to rankle in my wounds until death
shall close them forever.
‘But soon,’ he cried with sad and solemn enthusiasm, ‘I
shall die, and what I now feel be no longer felt. Soon these
burning miseries will be extinct. I shall ascend my funeral
pile triumphantly and exult in the agony of the torturing
flames. The light of that conflagration will fade away; my
ashes will be swept into the sea by the winds. My spirit will
sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not surely think thus.
Farewell.’
He sprang from the cabin window as he said this, upon
the ice raft which lay close to the vessel. He was soon borne
away by the waves and lost in darkness and distance.




The Forty Rules of Love
Elif Shafak is one of Turkey’s most acclaimed and outspoken novelists. She was born in 1971 and is the
author of six novels, including The Forty Rules of Love, The Bastard of Istanbul, The Gaze, The Saint of
Incipient Insanities and The Flea Palace, and one work of non-fiction. She teaches at the University of
Arizona and divides her time between the US and Istanbul.
The
Forty Rules
OF Love
ELIF SHAFAK
VIKING
an imprint of
PENGUIN BOOKS
VIKING
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3 (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada
Inc.)
Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd)
Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd)
Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi – 110 017, India
Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore 0632, New Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd)
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
www.penguin.com
First published in the United States of America by Viking Penguin, a member of Penguin Group (USA) Inc. 2010 First published in Great
Britain by Viking 2010
Copyright © Elif Shafak, 2010
The moral right of the author has been asserted
Grateful acknowledgement is made for permission to reprint excerpts from the following copyrighted works:‘Only Breath’ and ‘Why Wine
Is Forbidden’ from The Essential Rumi, translations by Coleman Barks (HarperCollins). Used by permission of Coleman Barks.
‘Tattooing in Qazwin’ from A Year with Rumi: Daily Readings by Coleman Barks. Copyright © 2006 by Coleman Barks. Reprinted by
permission of HarperCollins Publishers.
This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places and incidents are either the product of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously,
and any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, or to actual events or locales is entirely coincidental.
All rights reserved
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a
retrievalsystem, or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior
written permission of both the copyright owner and the above publisher of this book
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-0-141-95134-8
To Zahir & Zelda
When I was a child, I saw God,
I saw angels;
I watched the mysteries of the higher and lower worlds. I thought all men saw the same. At last I
realized that they did not see.…
—SHAMS OF TABRIZ
Table of Contents
Prologue
Ella
Sweet Blasphemy
Foreword
The Killer
The Forty Rules of Love
PART ONE
Shams
Ella
Shams
Ella
The Master
Ella
The Novice
Ella
The Master
The Letter
Shams
Ella
The Letter
The Novice
Shams
The Novice
Ella
PART TWO
Rumi
Shams
Hasan the Beggar
Shams
Ella
Desert Rose the Harlot
Hasan the Beggar
Suleiman the Drunk
Ella
Desert Rose the Harlot
Suleiman the Drunk
Ella
Ella
PART THREE
The Zealot
Shams
Rumi
Ella
Aladdin
Rumi
Kerra
Kimya
Ella
Kerra
Shams of Tabriz
Ella
Baybars the Warrior
Ella
Rumi
Kimya
Sultan Walad
Kerra
Rumi
Sultan Walad
Ella
Desert Rose the Harlot
Kimya
Shams
Ella
Desert Rose the Harlot
Ella
Shams
PART FOUR
Suleiman the Drunk
Aladdin
Shams
Ella
The Zealot
Husam the Student
Baybars the Warrior
Ella
Kerra
Sultan Walad
Suleiman the Drunk
Aladdin
Shams
Ella
Sultan Walad
PART FIVE
Rumi
Shams
Kimya
Kerra
Ella
Shams
Aladdin
Kimya
Desert Rose
Kimya
Ella
Suleiman the Drunk
The Killer
Ella
Aladdin
Sultan Walad
Rumi
Ella
Acknowledgments
Glossary
Sources
Prologue
Between your fingers you hold a stone and throw it into flowing water. The effect might not be easy to
see. There will be a small ripple where the stone breaks the surface and then a splash, muffled by the rush
of the surrounding river. That’s all.
Throw a stone into a lake. The effect will be not only visible but also far more lasting. The stone will
disrupt the still waters. A circle will form where the stone hit the water, and in a flash that circle will
multiply into another, then another. Before long the ripples caused by one plop will expand until they can
be felt everywhere along the mirrored surface of the water. Only when the circles reach the shore will
they stop and die out.
If a stone hits a river, the river will treat it as yet another commotion in its already tumultuous course.
Nothing unusual. Nothing unmanageable.
If a stone hits a lake, however, the lake will never be the same again.
For forty years Ella Rubinstein’s life had consisted of still waters—a predictable sequence of habits,
needs, and preferences. Though it was monotonous and ordinary in many ways, she had not found it
tiresome. During the last twenty years, every wish she had, every person she befriended, and every
decision she made was filtered through her marriage. Her husband, David, was a successful dentist who
worked hard and made a lot of money. She had always known that they did not connect on any deep level,
but connecting emotionally need not be a priority on a married couple’s list, she thought, especially for a
man and a woman who had been married for so long. There were more important things than passion and
love in a marriage, such as understanding, affection, compassion, and that most godlike act a person could
perform, forgiveness. Love was secondary to any of these. Unless, that is, one lived in novels or romantic
movies, where the protagonists were always larger than life and their love nothing short of legend.
Ella’s children topped her list of priorities. They had a beautiful daughter in college, Jeannette, and
teenage twins, Orly and Avi. Also, they had a twelve-year-old golden retriever, Spirit, who had been
Ella’s walking buddy in the mornings and her cheeriest companion ever since he’d been a puppy. Now he
was old, overweight, completely deaf, and almost blind; Spirit’s time was coming, but Ella preferred to
think he would go on forever. Then again, that was how she was. She never confronted the death of
anything, be it a habit, a phase, or a marriage, even when the end stood right in front of her, plain and
inevitable.
The Rubinsteins lived in Northampton, Massachusetts, in a large Victorian house that needed some
renovation but still was splendid, with five bedrooms, three baths, shiny hardwood floors, a three-car
garage, French doors, and, best of all, an outdoor Jacuzzi. They had life insurance, car insurance,
retirement plans, college savings plans, joint bank accounts, and, in addition to the house they lived in,
two prestigious apartments: one in Boston, the other in Rhode Island. She and David had worked hard for
all this. A big, busy house with children, elegant furniture, and the wafting scent of homemade pies might
seem a cliché to some people, but to them it was the picture of an ideal life. They had built their marriage
around this shared vision and had attained most, if not all, of their dreams.
On their last Valentine’s Day, her husband had given her a heart-shaped diamond pendant and a card
that read,
To my dear Ella,
A woman with a quiet manner, a generous heart, and the patience of a saint. Thank you for accepting me as I am. Thank you for being
my wife.
Yours,
David
Ella had never confessed this to David, but reading his card had felt like reading an obituary. This is what
they will write about me when I die, she had thought. And if they were sincere, they might also add this:
Building her whole life around her husband and children, Ella lacked any survival techniques to
help her cope with life’s hardships on her own. She was not the type to throw caution to the wind. Even
changing her daily coffee brand was a major effort.
All of which is why no one, including Ella, could explain what was going on when she filed for
divorce in the fall of 2008 after twenty years of marriage.
But there was a reason: love.
They did not live in the same city. Not even on the same continent. The two of them were not only miles
apart but also as different as day and night. Their lifestyles were so dissimilar that it seemed impossible
for them to bear each other’s presence, never mind fall in love. But it happened. And it happened fast, so
fast in fact that Ella had no time to realize what was happening and to be on guard, if one could ever be on
guard against love.
Love came to Ella as suddenly and brusquely as if a stone had been hurled from out of nowhere into the
tranquil pond of her life.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, MAY 17, 2008
Birds were singing outside her kitchen window on that balmy day in spring. Afterward Ella replayed the
scene in her mind so many times that, rather than a fragment from the past, it felt like an ongoing moment
still happening somewhere out there in the universe.
There they were, sitting around the table, having a late family lunch on a Saturday afternoon. Her
husband was filling his plate with fried chicken legs, his favorite food. Avi was playing his knife and fork
like drumsticks while his twin, Orly, was trying to calculate how many bites of which food she could eat
so as not to ruin her diet of 650 calories a day. Jeannette, who was a freshman at Mount Holyoke College
nearby, seemed lost in her thoughts as she spread cream cheese on another slice of bread. Also at the
table sat Aunt Esther, who had stopped by to drop off one of her famous marble cakes and then stayed on
for lunch. Ella had a lot of work to do afterward, but she was not ready to leave the table just yet. Lately
they didn’t have too many shared family meals, and she saw this as a golden chance for everyone to
reconnect.
“Esther, did Ella give you the good news?” David asked suddenly. “She found a great job.”
Though Ella had graduated with a degree in English literature and loved fiction, she hadn’t done much
in the field after college, other than editing small pieces for women’s magazines, attending a few book
clubs, and occasionally writing book reviews for some local papers. That was all. There was a time
when she’d aspired to become a prominent book critic, but then she simply accepted the fact that life had
carried her elsewhere, turning her into an industrious housewife with three kids and endless domestic
responsibilities.
Not that she complained. Being the mother, the wife, the dog walker, and the housekeeper kept her busy
enough. She didn’t have to be a breadwinner on top of all these. Though none of her feminist friends from
Smith College approved of her choice, she was satisfied to be a stay-at-home mom and grateful that she
and her husband could afford it. Besides, she had never abandoned her passion for books and still
considered herself a voracious reader.
A few years ago, things had begun to change. The children were growing up, and they made it clear that
they didn’t need her as much as they once had. Realizing that she had too much time to spare and no one to
spend it with, Ella had considered how it might be to find a job. David had encouraged her, but though
they kept talking and talking about it, she rarely pursued the opportunities that came her way, and when
she did, potential employers were always looking for someone younger or more experienced. Afraid of
being rejected over and over, she had simply let the subject drop.
Nevertheless, in May 2008 whatever obstacle had impeded her from finding a job all these years
unexpectedly vanished. Two weeks shy of her fortieth birthday, she found herself working for a literary
agency based in Boston. It was her husband who found her the job through one of his clients—or perhaps
through one of his mistresses.
“Oh, it’s no big deal,” Ella rushed to explain now. “I’m only a part-time reader for a literary agent.”
But David seemed determined not to let her think too little of her new job. “Come on, tell them it’s a
well-known agency,” he urged, nudging her, and when she refused to comply, he heartily agreed with
himself. “It’s a prestigious place, Esther. You should see the other assistants! Girls and boys fresh out of
the best colleges. Ella is the only one going back to work after being a housewife for years. Now, isn’t
she something?”
Ella wondered if, deep inside, her husband felt guilty about keeping her away from a career, or else
about cheating on her—these being the only two explanations she could think of as to why he was now
going overboard in his enthusiasm.
Still smiling, David concluded, “This is what I call chutzpah. We’re all proud of her.”
“She is a prize. Always was,” said Aunt Esther in a voice so sentimental that it sounded as if Ella had
left the table and was gone for good.
They all gazed at her lovingly. Even Avi didn’t make a cynical remark, and Orly for once seemed to
care about something other than her looks. Ella forced herself to appreciate this moment of kindness, but
she felt an overwhelming exhaustion that she had never experienced before. She secretly prayed for
someone to change the subject.
Jeannette, her older daughter, must have heard the prayer, for she suddenly chimed in, “I have some
good news, too.”
All heads turned toward her, faces beaming with expectation.
“Scott and I have decided to get married,” Jeannette announced. “Oh, I know what you guys are going
to say! That we haven’t finished college yet and all that, but you’ve got to understand, we both feel ready
for the next big move.”
An awkward silence descended upon the kitchen table as the warmth that had canopied them just a
moment ago evaporated. Orly and Avi exchanged blank looks, and Aunt Esther froze with her hand
tightened around a glass of apple juice. David put his fork aside as if he had no appetite left and squinted
at Jeannette with his light brown eyes that were deeply creased with smile lines at the corners. However,
right now he was anything but smiling. His mouth had drawn into a pout, as though he had just downed a
swig of vinegar.
“Great! I expected you to share my happiness, but I get this cold treatment instead,” Jeannette whined.
“You just said you were getting married,” remarked David as if Jeannette didn’t know what she’d said
and needed to be informed.
“Dad, I know it seems a bit too soon, but Scott proposed to me the other day and I’ve already said yes.”
“But why?” asked Ella.
From the way Jeannette looked at her, Ella reckoned, that was not the kind of question her daughter had
expected. She would rather have been asked “When?” or “How?” In either case it meant that she could
start shopping for her wedding dress. The question “Why?” was another matter altogether and had
completely caught her off guard.
“Because I love him, I guess.” Jeannette’s tone was slightly condescending.
“Honey, what I meant was, why the rush?” insisted Ella. “Are you pregnant or something?”
Aunt Esther twitched in her chair, her face stern, her anguish visible. She took an antacid tablet from
her pocket and started chewing on it.
“I’m going to be an uncle,” Avi said, giggling.
Ella held Jeannette’s hand and gave it a gentle squeeze. “You can always tell us the truth. You know
that, right? We’ll stand by you no matter what.”
“Mom, will you please stop that?” Jeannette snapped as she pulled her hand away. “This has nothing to
do with pregnancy. You’re embarrassing me.”
“I was just trying to help,” Ella responded calmly, calmness being a state she had been lately finding
harder and harder to achieve.
“By insulting me, you mean. Apparently the only way you can see Scott and me getting married is me
being knocked up! Does it ever occur to you that I might, just might, want to marry this guy because I love
him? We have been dating for eight months now.”
This elicited a scoff from Ella. “Oh, yeah, as if you could tell a man’s character in eight months! Your
father and I have been married for almost twenty years, and even we can’t claim to know everything about
each other. Eight months is nothing in a relationship!”
“It took God only six days to create the entire universe,” said Avi, beaming, but cold stares from
everyone at the table forced him back into silence.
Sensing the escalating tension, David, his eyes fixed on his elder daughter, his brow furrowed in
thought, interjected, “Honey, what your mom is trying to say is that dating is one thing, marrying is quite
another.”
“But, Dad, did you think we would date forever?” Jeannette asked.
Drawing in a deep breath, Ella said, “To be perfectly blunt, we were expecting you to find someone
better. You’re too young to get involved in any serious relationship.”
“You know what I’m thinking, Mom?” Jeannette said in a voice so flat as to be unrecognizable. “I’m
thinking you’re projecting your own fears onto me. But just because you married so young and had a baby
when you were my age, that doesn’t mean I’m going to make the same mistake.”
Ella blushed crimson as if slapped in the face. From deep within she remembered the difficult
pregnancy that had resulted in Jeannette’s premature birth. As a baby and then as a toddler, her daughter
had drained all of her energy, which was why she had waited six years before getting pregnant again.
“Sweetheart, we were happy for you when you started dating Scott,” David said cautiously, trying a
different strategy. “He’s a nice guy. But who knows what you’ll be thinking after graduation? Things might
be very different then.”
Jeannette gave a small nod that conveyed little more than feigned acquiescence. Then she said, “Is this
because Scott isn’t Jewish?”
David rolled his eyes in disbelief. He had always taken pride in being an open-minded and cultured
father, avoiding negative remarks about race, religion, or gender in the house.
Jeannette, however, seemed relentless. Turning to her mother, she asked, “Can you look me in the eye
and tell me you’d still be making the same objections if Scott were a young Jewish man named Aaron?”
Jeannette’s voice needled with bitterness and sarcasm, and Ella feared there was more of that welling
up inside her daughter.
“Sweetheart, I’ll be completely honest with you, even if you might not like it. I know how wonderful it
is to be young and in love. Believe me, I do. But to get married to someone from a different background is
a big gamble. And as your parents we want to make sure you’re doing the right thing.”
“And how do you know your right thing is the right thing for me?”
The question threw Ella off a little. She sighed and massaged her forehead, as if on the verge of a
migraine.
“I love him, Mom. Does that mean anything to you? Do you remember that word from somewhere? He
makes my heart beat faster. I can’t live without him.”
Ella heard herself chuckle. It was not her intention to make fun of her daughter’s feelings, not at all, but
that was probably what her laughing to herself sounded like. For reasons unknown to her, she felt
extremely nervous. She’d had fights with Jeannette before, hundreds of them, but today it felt as though she
were quarreling with something else, something bigger.
“Mom, haven’t you ever been in love?” Jeannette retorted, a hint of contempt creeping into her tone.
“Oh, give me a break! Stop daydreaming and get real, will you? You’re being so … ” Ella’s eyes
darted toward the window, hunting for a dramatic word, until finally she came up with “ … romantic!”
“What’s wrong with being romantic?” Jeannette asked, sounding offended.
Really, what was wrong with being romantic? Ella wondered. Since when was she so annoyed by
romanticism? Unable to answer the questions tugging at the edges of her mind, she continued all the same.
“Come on, honey. Which century are you living in? Just get it in your head, women don’t marry the men
they fall in love with. When push comes to shove, they choose the guy who’ll be a good father and a
reliable husband. Love is only a sweet feeling bound to come and quickly go away.”
When she finished talking, Ella turned to her husband. David had clasped his hands in front of him,
slowly as if through water, and was looking at her like he’d never seen her before.
“I know why you’re doing this,” Jeannette said. “You’re jealous of my happiness and my youth. You
want to make an unhappy housewife out of me. You want me to be you, Mom.”
Ella felt a strange, sinking feeling in the pit of her stomach, as if she had a giant rock sitting there. Was
she an unhappy housewife? A middle-aged mom trapped in a failing marriage? Was this how her children
saw her? And her husband, too? What about friends and neighbors? Suddenly she had the feeling that
everyone around her secretly pitied her, and the suspicion was so painful that she gasped.
“You should apologize to your mom,” David said, turning to Jeannette with a frown on his face.
“It’s all right. I don’t expect an apology,” Ella said dejectedly.
Jeannette gave her mother a mock leer. And just like that, she pushed back her chair, threw her napkin
aside, and walked out of the kitchen. After a minute Orly and Avi silently followed suit, either in an
unusual act of solidarity with their elder sister or because they’d gotten bored of all this adult talk. Aunt
Esther left next, mumbling some poor excuse while chewing fiercely on her last antacid tablet.
David and Ella remained at the table, an intense awkwardness hanging in the air between them. It
pained Ella to have to face this void, which, as they both knew, had nothing to do with Jeannette or any of
their children.
David grabbed the fork he had put aside and inspected it for a while. “So should I conclude that you
didn’t marry the man you loved?”
“Oh, please, that’s not what I meant.”
“What is it you meant, then?” David said, still talking to the fork. “I thought you were in love with me
when we got married.”
“I was in love with you,” Ella said, but couldn’t help adding, “back then.”
“So when did you stop loving me?” David asked, deadpan.
Ella looked at her husband in astonishment, like someone who had never seen her reflection before and
who now held a mirror to her face. Had she stopped loving him? It was a question she had never asked
herself before. She wanted to respond but lacked not so much the will as the words. Deep inside she
knew it was the two of them they should be concerned about, not their children. But instead they were
doing what they both were best at: letting the days go by, the routine take over, and time run its course of
inevitable torpor.
She started to cry, unable to hold back this continuing sadness that had, without her knowledge, become
a part of who she was. David turned his anguished face away. They both knew he hated to see her cry just
as much as she hated to cry in front of him. Fortunately, the phone rang just then, saving them.
David picked it up. “Hello … yes, she’s here. Hold on, please.”
Ella pulled herself together and spoke up, doing her best to sound in good spirits. “Yes, this is Ella.”
“Hi, this is Michelle. Sorry to bother you over the weekend,” chirped a young woman’s voice. “It’s just
that yesterday Steve wanted me to check in with you, and I simply forgot. Did you have a chance to start
working on the manuscript?”
“Oh.” Ella sighed, only now remembering the task awaiting her.
Her first assignment at the literary agency was to read a novel by an unknown European author. She
was then expected to write an extensive report on it.
“Tell him not to worry. I’ve already started reading,” Ella lied. Ambitious and headstrong, Michelle
was the kind of person she didn’t want to upset on her first assignment.
“Oh, good! How is it?”
Ella paused, puzzled as to what to say. She didn’t know anything about the manuscript, except that it
was a historical novel centered on the life of the famous mystic poet Rumi, who she learned was called
“the Shakespeare of the Islamic world.”
“Oh, it’s very … mystical.” Ella chuckled, hoping to cover with a joke.
But Michelle was all business. “Right,” she said flatly. “Listen, I think you need to get on this. It might
take longer than you expect to write a report on a novel like that.… ”
There was a distant muttering on the phone as Michelle’s voice trailed off. Ella imagined her juggling
several tasks simultaneously—checking e-mails, reading a review on one of her authors, taking a bite
from her tuna-salad sandwich, and polishing her fingernails—all while talking on the phone.
“Are you still there?” Michelle asked a minute later.
“Yes, I am.”
“Good. Listen, it’s crazy in here. I need to go. Just keep in mind the deadline is in three weeks.”
“I know,” Ella said abruptly, trying to sound more determined. “I’ll make the deadline.”
The truth was, Ella wasn’t sure she wanted to evaluate this manuscript at all. In the beginning she’d
been so eager and confident. It had felt thrilling to be the first one to read an unpublished novel by an
unknown author and to play however small a role in his fate. But now she wasn’t sure if she could
concentrate on a subject as irrelevant to her life as Sufism and a time as distant as the thirteenth century.
Michelle must have detected her hesitation. “Is there a problem?” she asked. When no answer came,
she grew insistent. “Listen, you can confide in me.”
After a bit of silence, Ella decided to tell her the truth.
“It’s just that I’m not sure I’m in the right state of mind these days to concentrate on a historical novel. I
mean, I’m interested in Rumi and all that, but still, the subject is alien to me. Perhaps you could give me
another novel—you know, something I could more easily relate to.”
“That’s such a skewed approach,” said Michelle. “You think you can work better with books you know
something about? Not at all! Just because you live in this state, you can’t expect to edit only novels that
take place in Massachusetts, right?”
“That’s not what I meant …” Ella said, and immediately realized she had uttered the same sentence too
many times this afternoon. She glanced at her husband to see if he, too, had noticed this, but David’s
expression was hard to decipher.
“Most of the time, we have to read books that have nothing to do with our lives. That’s part of our job.
Just this week I finished working on a book by an Iranian woman who used to operate a brothel in Tehran
and had to flee the country. Should I have told her to send the manuscript to an Iranian agency instead?”
“No, of course not,” Ella mumbled, feeling silly and guilty.
“Isn’t connecting people to distant lands and cultures one of the strengths of good literature?”
“Sure it is. Listen, forget what I said. You’ll have a report on your desk before the deadline,” Ella
conceded, hating Michelle for treating her as if she were the dullest person alive and hating herself for
allowing this to happen.
“Wonderful, that’s the spirit,” Michelle concluded in her singsong voice. “Don’t get me wrong, but I
think you should bear in mind that there are dozens of people out there who would love to have your job.
And most of them are almost half your age. That’ll keep you motivated.”
When Ella hung up the phone, she found David watching her, his face solemn and reserved. He seemed
to be waiting for them to pick up where they’d left off. But she didn’t feel like mulling over their
daughter’s future anymore, if that was what they’d been worrying about in the first place.
Later in the day, she was alone on the porch sitting in her favorite rocking chair, looking at the orangeyred
Northampton sunset. The sky felt so close and open that you could almost touch it. Her brain had gone
quiet, as if tired of all the noise swirling inside. This month’s credit-card payments, Orly’s bad eating
habits, Avi’s poor grades, Aunt Esther and her sad cakes, her dog Spirit’s decaying health, Jeannette’s
marriage plans, her husband’s secret flings, the absence of love in her life … One by one, she locked them
all in small mental boxes.
In that frame of mind, Ella took the manuscript out of its package and bounced it in her hand, as if
weighing it. The title of the novel was written on the cover in indigo ink: Sweet Blasphemy.
Ella had been told that nobody knew much about the author—a certain A. Z. Zahara, who lived in
Holland. His manuscript had been shipped to the literary agency from Amsterdam with a postcard inside
the envelope. On the front of the postcard was a picture of tulip fields in dazzling pinks, yellows, and
purples, and on the back a note written in delicate handwriting:
Dear Sir/Madam,
Greetings from Amsterdam. The story I herewith send you takes place in thirteenth-century Konya in Asia Minor. But I sincerely
believe that it cuts across countries, cultures, and centuries.
I hope you will have the time to read SWEET BLASPHEMY, a historical, mystical novel on the remarkable bond between Rumi,
the best poet and most revered spiritual leader in the history of Islam, and Shams of Tabriz, an unknown, unconventional dervish full of
scandals and surprises.
May love be always with you and you always surrounded with love.
A. Z. Zahara
Ella sensed that the postcard had piqued the literary agent’s curiosity. But Steve was not a man who
had time to read the work of an amateur writer. So he’d handed the package to his assistant, Michelle,
who had passed it on to her new assistant. This is how Sweet Blasphemy ended up in Ella’s hands.
Little did she know that this was going to be not just any book, but the book that changed her life. In the
time she was reading it, her life would be rewritten.
Ella turned the first page. There was a note about the writer.
A. Z. Zahara lives in Amsterdam with his books, cats, and turtles when he is not traveling around the
world. Sweet Blasphemy is his first novel and most probably his last. He has no intention of becoming
a novelist and has written this book purely out of admiration and love for the great philosopher,
mystic, and poet Rumi and his beloved sun, Shams of Tabriz.
Her eyes moved down the page to the next line. And there Ella read something that rang strangely
familiar:
For despite what some people say, love is not only a sweet feeling bound to come and quickly go
away.
Her jaw dropped as she realized this was the contradiction of the exact sentence she had spoken to her
daughter in the kitchen earlier in the day. She stood still for a moment, shivering with the thought that
some mysterious force in the universe, or else this writer, whoever he might be, was spying on her.
Perhaps he had written this book knowing beforehand what kind of person was going to read it first. This
writer had her in mind as his reader. For some reason unbeknownst to her, Ella found the idea both
disturbing and exciting.
In many ways the twenty-first century is not that different from the thirteenth century. Both will be
recorded in history as times of unprecedented religious clashes, cultural misunderstandings, and a
general sense of insecurity and fear of the Other. At times like these, the need for love is greater than
ever.
A sudden wind blew in her direction, cool and strong, scattering the leaves on the porch. The beauty of
the sunset drifted toward the western horizon, and the air felt dull, joyless.
Because love is the very essence and purpose of life. As Rumi reminds us, it hits everybody,
including those who shun love—even those who use the word “romantic” as a sign of disapproval.
Ella was as bowled over as if she had read there, “Love hits everybody, even a middle-aged
housewife in Northampton named Ella Rubinstein.”
Her gut instinct told her to put the manuscript aside, go into the house, give Michelle a call, and tell her
there was no way she could write a report on this novel. Instead she took a deep breath, turned the page,
and started to read.
Sweet
Blasphemy
A Novel
A. Z. ZAHARA
Sufi mystics say the secret of the Qur’an lies in the verse Al-Fatiha,
And the secret of Al-Fatiha lies in Bismillahirrahmanirrahim
And the quintessence of Bismillah is the letter ba,
And there is a dot below that letter.…
The dot underneath the B embodies the entire universe.…
The Mathnawi starts with B,
Just like all the chapters in this novel.…
Foreword
Beset with religious clashes, political disputes, and endless power struggles, the thirteenth century was a
turbulent period in Anatolia. In the West, the Crusaders, on their way to Jerusalem, occupied and sacked
Constantinople, leading to the partition of the Byzantine Empire. In the East, highly disciplined Mongol
armies swiftly expanded under the military genius of Genghis Khan. In between, different Turkish tribes
fought among themselves while the Byzantines tried to recover their lost land, wealth, and power. It was a
time of unprecedented chaos when Christians fought Christians, Christians fought Muslims, and Muslims
fought Muslims. Everywhere one turned, there was hostility and anguish and an intense fear of what might
happen next.
In the midst of this chaos lived a distinguished Islamic scholar, known as Jalal ad-Din Rumi.
Nicknamed Mawlana—“Our Master”—by many, he had thousands of disciples and admirers from all
over the region and beyond, and was regarded as a beacon to all Muslims.
In 1244, Rumi met Shams—a wandering dervish with unconventional ways and heretical
proclamations. Their encounter altered both their lives. At the same time, it marked the beginning of a
solid, unique friendship that Sufis in the centuries to follow likened to the union of two oceans. By
meeting this exceptional companion, Rumi was transformed from a mainstream cleric to a committed
mystic, passionate poet, advocate of love, and originator of the ecstatic dance of the whirling dervishes,
daring to break free of all conventional rules. In an age of deeply embedded bigotries and clashes, he
stood for a universal spirituality, opening his doors to people of all backgrounds. Instead of an outeroriented
jihad—defined as “the war against infidels” and carried out by many in those days just as in the
present—Rumi stood up for an inner-oriented jihad where the aim was to struggle against and ultimately
prevail over one’s ego, nafs.
Not all people welcomed these ideas, however, just as not all people open their hearts to love. The
powerful spiritual bond between Shams and Rumi became the target of rumor, slander, and attack. They
were misunderstood, envied, vilified, and ultimately betrayed by those closest to them. Three years after
they met, they were tragically separated.
But the story didn’t end there.
In truth, there never was an end. Almost eight hundred years later, the spirits of Shams and Rumi are
still alive today, whirling amid us somewhere.…
The Killer
ALEXANDRIA, NOVEMBER 1252
Beneath dark waters in a well, he is dead now. Yet his eyes follow me wherever I go, bright and
imposing, like two dark stars ominously hanging in the sky above. I came to Alexandria hoping that if I
traveled far enough, I could escape this piercing memory and stop the wail echoing inside my mind, that
very last cry he gave out before his face drained of blood, his eyes bulged out, and his throat closed in an
unfinished gasp, the farewell of a stabbed man. The howl of a trapped wolf.
When you kill someone, something from that person passes to you—a sigh, a smell or a gesture. I call it
“the curse of the victim.” It clings to your body and seeps into your skin, going all the way into your heart,
and thus continues to live within you. People who see me on the street have no way of knowing this, but I
carry with me the traces of all the men I have killed. I wear them around my neck like invisible necklaces,
feeling their presence against my flesh, tight and heavy. Uncomfortable though it feels, I have gotten used
to living with this burden and have accepted it as part of my job. Ever since Cain slew Abel, in every
murderer breathes the man he murdered, that much I know. It doesn’t disturb me. Not anymore. But then
why was I shaken so badly after that last incident?
Everything was different this time, right from the start. Take the way I found the job, for instance. Or
should I say instead the way the job found me? Early in the spring of 1248, I was working for a brothel
patron in Konya, a hermaphrodite famous for her anger and wrath. My task was to help her to keep the
harlots under control and intimidate the customers who didn’t behave.
I remember the day vividly. I was hunting a harlot who had escaped the brothel to find God. She was a
beautiful young woman, which sort of broke my heart, because when I caught up with her, I was going to
ruin her face so bad that no man would ever want to look at her again. I was this close to catching the
stupid woman when I found a mysterious letter on my doorsill. I had never learned how to read, so I took
it to the madrassa, where I paid a student to read it for me.
It turned out to be an anonymous letter signed by “a few true believers.”
“We have heard from a reliable source where you came from and who you really were,” the letter said.
“A former member of the Assassins! We also know that after the death of Hassan Sabbah and the
incarceration of your leaders, the order is not what it used to be. You came to Konya to escape
persecution, and you have been under disguise ever since.”
The letter said that my services were urgently needed on a matter of great importance. It assured me
that payment would be satisfactory. If interested, I was to appear in a well-known tavern that evening
after dark. Once there, I had to sit at the table closest to the window, my back to the door, my head bowed
down, and my eyes fixed on the floor. I would soon be joined by the person or persons who would hire
me. They were going to give me all the information I needed to know. Neither when they arrived nor as
they left, and at no point during our conversation, could I raise my head and look at their faces.
It was a strange letter. But then again, I was used to dealing with the whims of clients. Over the years I
had been hired by all sorts of people, and most of them wished to keep their names secret. Experience had
taught me that, more often than not, the more strongly a client strived to hide his identity, the closer he
happened to be to his victim, but that was none of my business. My task was to kill. Not to inquire into the
reasons behind my assignment. Ever since I left Alamut years ago, this had been the life I chose for
myself.
I seldom ask questions anyway. Why would I? Most folks I know have at least one person they want to
get rid of. The fact that they don’t do anything about it doesn’t necessarily mean they are immune to the
desire to kill. In fact, everyone has it in him to kill someday. People don’t get that until it happens to them.
They think of themselves as incapable of murder. But it is just a matter of coincidence. Sometimes even a
gesture is enough to inflame their tempers. A deliberate misunderstanding, a squabble over nothing, or
simply being at the wrong place at the wrong time can bring out a destructive streak in people who are
otherwise good and decent fellows. Anyone can kill. But not everyone can kill a stranger in cold blood.
That is where I enter the picture.
I did the dirty work of others. Even God recognized the need for someone like me in His holy scheme
when He appointed Azrael the Archangel of Death to terminate lives. In this way human beings feared,
cursed, and hated the angel while His hands remained clean and His name unblemished. It wasn’t fair to
the angel. But then again, this world was not known for its justice, was it?
When darkness settled, I went to the tavern. The table by the window happened to be occupied by a
scar-faced man who seemed to be in deep sleep. It occurred to me to wake him up and tell him to go
somewhere else, but with drunks you never knew how they would react, and I had to be careful not to
draw too much attention to myself. So I sat at the next available table, facing the window.
Before long, two men arrived. They sat on either side of me so as not to show their faces. I didn’t need
to look at them, though, to realize how young they were and how unprepared for the step they were about
to take.
“You came highly recommended,” said one of them, his tone not so much cautious as apprehensive.
“We were told you were the best.”
It felt funny, the way he said it, but I suppressed my smile. I noticed they were scared of me, which was
a good thing. If they were scared sufficiently, they could not dare to do me wrong.
So I said, “Yes, I am the best. That is why they call me Jackal Head. I have never let my clients down,
no matter how hard the task.”
“Good.” He sighed. “Because this might not be an easy task.”
Now the other guy spoke. “See, there is this man who has made himself too many enemies. Ever since
he came to this town, he has brought nothing but trouble. We have warned him several times, but he pays
us no attention. If anything, he has become all the more contentious. He leaves us no other option.”
It was always the same. Each time the clients tried to explain themselves before we cut a deal, as if my
approval could in any way lessen the gravity of what they were about to do.
“I know what you mean. Tell me, who is this person?” I asked.
They seemed reluctant to give me a name, offering vague descriptions instead.
“He is a heretic who has nothing to do with Islam. An unruly man full of sacrilege and blasphemy. A
maverick of a dervish.”
As soon as I heard this last word, a creepy feeling spread over my arms. My mind raced. I had killed
all sorts of people, young and old, men and women, but a dervish, a man of faith, was not among them. I
had my superstitions and didn’t want to draw God’s wrath upon me, for despite everything I believed in
God.
“I’m afraid I’m going to have to turn it down. I don’t think I want to kill a dervish. Find someone else.”
With that, I stood up to leave. But one of the men grabbed my hand and beseeched, “Wait, please. Your
payment will be commensurate with your effort. Whatever your fee is, we are ready to double the price.”
“How about triple?” I asked, convinced that they wouldn’t be able to raise the amount that high.
But to my surprise, after a brief hesitation, they both agreed. I sat back in my seat, feeling jittery. With
this money I could finally afford the price of a bride and get married and stop fretting over how to make
ends meet. Dervish or not, anyone was worth killing for this amount.
How could I know in that moment that I was making the biggest mistake of my life and would spend the
rest of my days regretting it? How could I know it would be so hard to kill the dervish and that even long
after he was dead, his knifelike gaze would follow me everywhere?
Four years have passed since I stabbed him in that courtyard and dumped his body in a well, waiting to
hear the splash that never came. Not a sound. It was as if rather than falling down into the water he fell up
toward the sky. I still cannot sleep without having nightmares, and if I look at water, any source of water,
for more than a few seconds, a cold horror grips my whole body and I throw up.
PART ONE
Earth
THE THINGS THAT ARE SOLID, ABSORBED, AND STILL
Shams
AN INN OUTSIDE SAMARKAND, MARCH 1242
Beeswax candles flickered in front of my eyes above the cracked wooden table. The vision that took hold
of me this evening was a most lucid one.
There was a big house with a courtyard full of yellow roses in bloom and in the middle of the
courtyard a well with the coolest water in the world. It was a serene, late-autumn night with a full
moon in the sky. A few nocturnal animals hooted and howled in the background. In a little while, a
middle-aged man with a kind face, broad shoulders, and deep-set hazel eyes walked out of the house,
looking for me. His expression was vexed, and his eyes were immensely sad.
“Shams, Shams, where are you?” he shouted left and right.
The wind blew hard, and the moon hid behind a cloud, as if it didn’t want to witness what was about
to happen. The owls stopped hooting, the bats stopped flapping their wings, and even the fire in the
hearth inside the house did not crackle. An absolute stillness descended upon the world.
The man slowly approached the well, bent over, and looked down below. “Shams, dearest,” he
whispered. “Are you there?”
I opened my mouth to answer, but no sound came out of my lips.
The man leaned closer and looked down into the well again. At first he couldn’t see anything other
than the darkness of the water. But then, deep down at the bottom of the well, he caught sight of my
hand floating aimlessly on the rippling water like a rickety raft after a heavy storm. Next he
recognized a pair of eyes—two shiny black stones, staring up at the full moon now coming out from
behind thick, dark clouds. My eyes were fixed on the moon as if waiting for an explanation from the
skies for my murder.
The man fell on his knees, crying and pounding his chest. “They killed him! They killed my Shams!”
he yelled.
Just then a shadow scurried out from behind a bush, and with fast, furtive moves it hopped over the
garden wall, like a wildcat. But the man didn’t notice the killer. Seized by a crushing pain, he
screamed and screamed until his voice shattered like glass and flew all over into the night in tiny,
prickly shards.
“Hey, you! Stop screaming like a maniac.”
“…”
“Cut that awful noise or I am going to kick you out!”
“…”
“I said shut up! Do you hear me? Shut up!”
It was a male voice that shouted these words, booming menacingly close. I pretended not to hear him,
preferring to stay inside my vision for at least a bit longer. I wanted to learn more about my death. I also
wanted to see the man with the saddest eyes. Who was he? How was he related to me, and why was he so
desperately looking for me on an autumn night?
But before I could sneak another look at my vision, someone from the other dimension grabbed me by
the arm and shook me so hard I felt my teeth rattle in my mouth. It yanked me back into this world.
Slowly, reluctantly, I opened my eyes and saw the person standing beside me. He was a tall, corpulent
man with a hoary beard and thick mustache, curved and pointy at the tips. I recognized him as the
innkeeper. Almost instantly I noticed two things about him: That he was a man used to intimidating people
with tough talk and sheer violence. And that right now he was furious.
“What do you want?” I asked. “Why are you pulling my arm?”
“What do I want?” the innkeeper roared with a scowl. “I want you to stop screaming, for starters, that’s
what I want. You are scaring away my customers.”
“Really? Have I been screaming?” I muttered as I managed to pull myself free from his grip.
“You bet you were! You were screaming like a bear with a thorn stuck in its paw. What happened to
you? Did you doze off during dinner? You must have had a nightmare or something.”
I knew that this was the only plausible explanation, and if I went along with it, the innkeeper would be
satisfied and leave me in peace. Still, I did not want to lie.
“No, brother, I have neither fallen asleep nor had a bad dream,” I said. “Actually, I never have
dreams.”
“How do you explain all that screaming, then?” the innkeeper wanted to know.
“I had a vision. That’s different.”
He gave me a bewildered look and sucked on the ends of his mustache for a while. Finally he said,
“You dervishes are as crazy as rats in a pantry. Especially you wandering types. All day long you fast and
pray and walk under the scorching sun. No wonder you start hallucinating—your brain is fried!”
I smiled. He could be right. They say there is a thin line between losing yourself in God and losing your
mind.
Two serving boys appeared just then, carrying between them a huge tray stacked with plates: freshly
grilled goat, dried salted fish, spiced mutton, wheat cakes, chickpeas with meatballs, and lentil soup with
sheep’s-tail fat. They went around the hall distributing them, filling the air with the scents of onion, garlic,
and spices. When they stopped by my end of the table, I got myself a bowl of steaming soup and some
dark bread.
“Do you have money to pay for those?” the innkeeper asked, with a flicker of condescension.
“No, I don’t,” I said. “But allow me to offer an exchange. In return for the food and the room, I could
interpret your dreams.”
To this he responded with a sneer, his arms akimbo, “You just told me you never had dreams.”
“That’s right. I am a dream interpreter who doesn’t have dreams of his own.”
“I should toss you out of here. Like I said, you dervishes are nuts,” the innkeeper said, spitting out the
words. “Here is some advice for you: I don’t know how old you are, but I’m sure you have prayed enough
for both worlds. Find a nice woman and settle down. Have children. That will help to keep your feet on
the ground. What is the point of roaming the world when it’s the same misery everywhere? Trust me.
There is nothing new out there. I have customers from the farthest corners of the world. After a few
drinks, I hear the same stories from them all. Men are the same everywhere. Same food, same water, same
old crap.”
“I’m not looking for something different. I’m looking for God,” I said. “My quest is a quest for God.”
“Then you are looking for Him in the wrong place,” he retorted, his voice suddenly thickened. “God
has left this place! We don’t know when He will be back.”
My heart flailed away at my chest wall upon hearing this. “When one speaks ill of God, he speaks ill of
himself,” I said.
An odd, slanted smile etched along the innkeeper’s mouth. In his face I saw bitterness and indignation,
and something else that resembled childish hurt.
“Doesn’t God say, I am closer to you than your jugular vein?” I asked. “God is not someplace far up
in the sky. He is inside each and every one of us. That is why He never abandons us. How can He
abandon Himself?”
“But He does abandon,” the innkeeper remarked, his eyes cold and defiant. “If God is here but does not
move a finger when we suffer the worst ends, what does that tell us about Him?”
“It is the first rule, brother,” I said. “How we see God is a direct reflection of how we see ourselves.
If God brings to mind mostly fear and blame, it means there is too much fear and blame welled inside
us. If we see God as full of love and compassion, so are we.”
The innkeeper immediately objected, but I could see that my words had surprised him. “How is that any
different than saying God is a product of our imagination? I don’t get it.”
But my answer was interrupted by a ruckus that broke out at the back of the dining hall. When we turned
in that direction, we saw two rough-looking men yelling drunken gibberish. With unbridled insolence they
were bullying the other customers, snatching food off their bowls, drinking from their cups, and, should
anyone protest, mocking them like two naughty maktab boys.
“Somebody should take care of these troublemakers, don’t you think?” hissed the innkeeper between
clenched teeth. “Now, watch me!”
In a flash he reached the end of the hall, yanked one of the drunken customers from his seat, and
punched him in the face. The man must not have been expecting this at all, for he collapsed on the floor
like an empty sack. A barely audible sigh came out of his lips, but other than that he made no noise.
The other man proved stronger, and he fiercely fought back, but it didn’t take the innkeeper long to
knock him down, too. He kicked his unruly customer in the ribs and then stomped on his hand, grinding it
under his heavy boots. We heard the crack of a finger breaking, or maybe more.
“Stop it!” I exclaimed. “You are going to kill him. Is that what you want?”
As a Sufi I had sworn to protect life and do no harm. In this world of illusions, so many people were
ready to fight without any reason, and so many others fought for a reason. But the Sufi was the one who
wouldn’t fight even if he had a reason. There was no way I could resort to violence. But I could thrust
myself like a soft blanket between the innkeeper and the customers to keep them apart.
“You stay out of this, dervish, or I’ll beat the hell out of you, too!” the innkeeper shouted, but we both
knew he wasn’t going to do that.
A minute later, when the serving boys lifted up the two customers, one of them had a broken finger and
the other a broken nose, and there was blood all over. A fearful silence descended on the dining hall.
Proud with the awe he’d inspired, the innkeeper gave me a sidelong look. When he spoke again, it
sounded as if he were addressing everyone around, his voice soaring high and wild, like a marauder bird
boasting in the open sky.
“You see, dervish, it wasn’t always like this. Violence wasn’t my element, but it is now. When God
forgets about us down here, it falls upon us common people to toughen up and restore justice. So next time
you talk to Him, you tell Him that. Let Him know that when He abandons his lambs, they won’t meekly
wait to be slaughtered. They will turn into wolves.”
I shrugged as I motioned toward the door. “You are mistaken.”
“Am I wrong in saying I was a lamb once and have turned into a wolf?”
“No, you got that right. I can see that you have become a wolf indeed. But you are wrong in calling
what you are doing ‘justice.’ ”
“Wait, I haven’t finished with you!” the innkeeper shouted behind my back. “You owe me. In return for
food and bed, you were going to interpret my dreams.”
“I’ll do something better,” I suggested. “I’ll read your palm.”
I turned back and walked toward him, looking hard into his burning eyes. Instinctively, distrustfully, he
flinched. Still, when I grabbed his right hand and turned his palm up, he didn’t push me away. I inspected
the lines and found them deep, cracked, marking uneven paths. Bit by bit, the colors in his aura appeared
to me: a rusty brown and a blue so pale as to be almost gray. His spiritual energy was hollowed out and
thinned around the edges, as if it had no more strength to defend itself against the outside world. Deep
inside, the man was no more alive than a wilting plant. To make up for the loss of his spiritual energy, he
had doubled up his physical energy, which he used in excess.
My heart beat faster, for I had started seeing something. At first dimly, as if behind a veil, then with
increasing clarity, a scene appeared in front of my eyes.
A young woman with chestnut hair, bare feet with black tattoos, and an embroidered red shawl
draped over her shoulders.
“You have lost a loved one,” I said, and took his left palm in my hand.
Her breasts swollen with milk and her belly so huge it looks as if it could rip apart. She is stuck in a
hut on fire. There are warriors around the house, riding horses with silver-gilded saddles. The thick
smell of burning hay and human flesh. Mongol riders, their noses flat and wide, necks thick and short,
and hearts as hard as rocks. The mighty army of Genghis Khan.
“You have lost two loved ones,” I corrected myself. “Your wife was pregnant with your first child.”
His eyebrows clamped down, his eyes fixed on his leather boots, and his lips tightly pursed, the
innkeeper’s face creased into an unreadable map. Suddenly he looked old beyond his years.
“I realize that it’s no consolation to you, but I think there is something you should know,” I said. “It
wasn’t the fire or the smoke that killed her. It was a wooden plank in the ceiling that collapsed on her
head. She died instantly, without any pain. You always assumed she had suffered terribly, but in reality
she did not suffer at all.”
The innkeeper furrowed his brow, bowed under a pressure only he could understand. His voice turned
raspy as he asked, “How do you know all that?”
I ignored the question. “You have been blaming yourself for not giving her a proper funeral. You still
see her in your dreams, crawling out of the pit she was buried in. But your mind is playing games with
you. In truth, your wife and son are both fine, traveling in infinity, as free as a speck of light.”
I then added, measuring each word, “You can become a lamb again, because you still have it in you.”
Upon hearing this the innkeeper pulled his hand away, as if he had just touched a sizzling pan. “I don’t
like you, dervish,” he said. “I’ll let you stay here tonight. But make sure you are gone early in the morning.
I don’t want to see your face around here again.”
It was always like this. When you spoke the truth, they hated you. The more you talked about love, the
more they hated you.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, MAY 18, 2008
Bested by the tension that followed the argument with David and Jeannette, Ella was so drained she had
to stop reading Sweet Blasphemy for a while. She felt as though the lid of a boiling cauldron had suddenly
been lifted, emitting old conflicts and new resentments in the rising steam. Unfortunately, it was no one
other than she who had lifted that lid. And she had done it by dialing Scott’s number and asking him not to
marry her daughter.
Later in her life, she would deeply regret everything she’d uttered during this phone conversation. But
on this day in May, she was so sure of herself and the ground beneath her feet that she could not for the
life of her fathom any dire consequences from her intrusion.
“Hi, Scott. This is Jeannette’s mom, Ella,” she said, trying to sound jovial, as if calling her daughter’s
boyfriend were something she did all the time. “Do you have a minute to talk?”
“Mrs. Rubinstein, how may I help you?” Scott stammered, surprised but ever so civilized.
And in a no-less-civilized tone, Ella told him that although she had nothing against him personally, he
was too young and inexperienced to marry her daughter. Upset as he might be to receive this call now, she
added, someday in the not-so-distant future he would understand and even thank her for warning him in
time. Until then she asked him to kindly drop the subject of marriage and to keep this phone conversation
between the two of them.
There was a thick, dense silence.
“Mrs. Rubinstein, I don’t think you understand,” Scott said when he finally found his voice. “Jeannette
and I love each other.”
There it was again! How could people be naïve enough to expect love to open every door for them?
They looked at love as if it were a magic wand that could fix everything with one miraculous touch.
But Ella didn’t say any of this. Instead she said, “I understand how you feel, believe me, I do. But you
are too young and life is long. Who knows? Tomorrow you might fall in love with someone else.”
“Mrs. Rubinstein, I don’t want to be rude, but don’t you think the same rule applies to everyone,
including yourself? Who knows? Tomorrow you, too, might fall in love with someone else.”
Ella chuckled, louder and longer than she intended.
“I’m a married woman. I’ve made a choice for a lifetime. So did my husband. And that’s exactly my
point. Marriage is a serious decision, which needs to be considered very carefully.”
“Are you telling me not to marry your daughter, who I love, because I might love an unidentified other
in an indefinite future?” Scott demanded.
The conversation went downhill from there, filled with distress and disappointment. When they finally
hung up, Ella headed to the kitchen and did what she always did at times of emotional unrest: She cooked.
Half an hour later, she received a call from her husband.
“I can’t believe you called Scott to ask him not to marry our daughter. Tell me you didn’t do this.”
Ella gasped. “Wow, word gets out fast. Honey, let me explain.”
But David interjected tensely, “There is nothing to explain. What you did was wrong. Scott told
Jeannette, and now she’s extremely upset. She’ll be staying with her friends for a few days. She doesn’t
want to see you right now.” He paused briefly. “And I don’t blame her.”
That evening Jeannette wasn’t the only one who didn’t come home. David sent Ella a text message
informing her of a sudden emergency that had arisen. There was no explanation as to the nature of the
emergency.
It was so unlike him and against the spirit of their marriage. He might flirt with woman after woman,
could even sleep with them and spend his money on them for all she knew, but he had always come home
and taken his place at the table in the evenings. No matter how deep the rift between them, she always
cooked and he always ate, gladly and gratefully, whatever she put on his plate. At the end of each dinner,
David never failed to thank her—a heartfelt thank-you that she always took to be a coded apology for his
infidelities. She forgave him. She always did.
This was the first time her husband had acted this brazen, and Ella blamed herself for the change. But
then again, “guilt” was Ella Rubinstein’s middle name.
When she sat at the table with her twins, Ella’s guilt gave way to melancholy. She resisted Avi’s pleas to
order pizza and Orly’s attempts not to eat anything, forcing them to munch on wild rice with green peas
and roast beef with mustard glaze. And although on the surface she was the same hands-on, concerned
mother, she felt a surge of despair rise in her, a sharp taste in her mouth, sour like bile.
When dinner was over, Ella sat at the kitchen table on her own, finding the stillness around her heavy
and unsettling. Suddenly the food she had cooked, the outcome of hours of hard work, seemed not only
dull and boring but easily replaceable. She felt sorry for herself. It was a pity that, at almost forty, she
hadn’t been able to make more of her life. She had so much love to give and yet no one demanding it.
Her thoughts turned to Sweet Blasphemy. She was intrigued by the character of Shams of Tabriz.
“It could be nice to have someone like him around,” she joked to herself. “Never a dull day with a guy
like him!”
And somehow the image that popped up in her mind was of a tall, dark-looking, mysterious man with
leather pants, a motorcycle jacket, and black hair that fell to his shoulders, riding a shiny red HarleyDavidson
with multicolored tassels hanging from the handlebars. She smiled at the image. A handsome,
sexy, Sufi motorcyclist riding fast on an empty highway! Wouldn’t it be nice to get picked up while
hitchhiking by a guy like that?
Ella then wondered what Shams would see if he read her palm. Would he explain to her why her mind
turned from time to time into a coven of dark thoughts? Or how come she felt so lonely even though she
had a large, loving family? What about the colors in her aura? Were they bright and bold? Had anything in
her life been bright and bold lately? Or ever?
It was then and there, while sitting alone at the kitchen table with only a faint glimmer of light from the
oven, that Ella realized that despite her high-flying words denying it, and despite her ability to keep a stiff
upper lip, deep inside she longed for love.
Shams
AN INN OUTSIDE SAMARKAND, MARCH 1242
Burdened with loneliness, all fast asleep in separate dreams, were more than a dozen weary travelers
upstairs at the inn. I stepped over bare feet and hands to reach my empty bedroll that reeked of sweat and
mold. I lay there in the dark, mulling over the day’s events and reflecting on any divine signs I might have
witnessed but, in my haste or ignorance, failed to appreciate.
Since I was a boy, I had received visions and heard voices. I always talked to God, and He always
responded. Some days I ascended all the way up to the seventh sky as light as a whisper. Then I
descended into the deepest pits of the earth, suffused with the smells of soil, hidden away like a rock
buried under mighty oaks and sweet chestnuts. Every so often I lost my appetite for food and went without
eating for days on end. None of these things scared me, though in time I had learned not to mention them to
others. Human beings tended to disparage what they couldn’t comprehend. I had learned that firsthand.
The first person to misjudge my visions was my father. I must have been ten years old when I started
seeing my guardian angel on a daily basis and was naïve enough to think that everyone else did as well.
One day, while my father was teaching me how to build a cedar chest so that I could become a carpenter
like him, I told him about my guardian angel.
“You have a wild imagination, son,” my father said dryly. “And you better keep it to yourself. We don’t
want to upset the villagers again.”
A few days before, the neighbors had complained about me to my parents, accusing me of acting
strange and scaring their kids.
“I don’t understand your ways, my son. Why can’t you accept that you are no more remarkable than
your parents?” my father asked. “Every child takes after his father and mother. So have you.”
That was when I realized that although I loved my parents and craved their love, they were strangers to
me.
“Father, I am from a different egg than your other children. Think of me as a duckling raised by hens. I
am not a domestic bird destined to spend his life in a chicken coop. The water that scares you rejuvenates
me. For unlike you I can swim, and swim I shall. The ocean is my homeland. If you are with me, come to
the ocean. If not, stop interfering with me and go back to the chicken coop.”
My father’s eyes grew large, then small and distant. “If this is the way you talk to your father now,” he
said gravely, “I wonder how you will address your enemies when you grow up.”
Much to the chagrin of my parents, the visions did not disappear as I got older. If anything, they became
more intense and gripping. I knew I made my parents nervous, and I felt guilty for upsetting them so, but
the truth is, I didn’t know how to end the visions, and even if I had, I don’t think I would have. Before
long I left my house for good. Since then Tabriz has become a smooth, sweet word, so fine and delicate
that it melts on my tongue. Three scents accompany my memories of this place: cut wood, poppy-seed
bread, and the soft, crisp smell of snow.
I have been a wandering dervish ever since, not sleeping in the same place more than once, not eating
out of the same bowl twice in a row, every day seeing different faces around me. When hungry, I earn a
few coins by interpreting dreams. In this state I roam east and west, searching for God high and low. I
hunt everywhere for a life worth living and a knowledge worth knowing. Having roots nowhere, I have
everywhere to go.
During my travels I have taken all sorts of roads, from popular trade routes to forgotten tracks where
you wouldn’t run into a soul for days on end. From the coasts of the Black Sea to the cities of Persia, from
the vast steppes of Central Asia to the sand dunes of Arabia, I have passed through thick forests, flat
grasslands, and deserts; sojourned at caravansaries and hostels; consulted with the learned men in age-old
libraries; listened to tutors teaching little children in maktabs; discussed tafsir and logic with students in
madrassas; visited temples, monasteries, and shrines; meditated with hermits in their caves; performed
zikr with dervishes; fasted with sages and dined with heretics; danced with shamans under the full moon;
come to know people of all faiths, ages, and professions; and witnessed misfortunes and miracles alike.
I have seen poverty-stricken villages, fields blackened by fire, and plundered towns where the rivers
ran red and there were no men left alive above the age of ten. I have seen the worst and the best in
humanity. Nothing surprises me anymore.
As I went through all these experiences, I began to compile a list that wasn’t written down in any book,
only inscribed in my soul. This personal list I called The Basic Principles of the Itinerant Mystics of
Islam. To me these were as universal, dependable, and invariable as the laws of nature. Together they
constituted The Forty Rules of the Religion of Love, which could be attained through love and love only.
And one of those rules said, The Path to the Truth is a labor of the heart, not of the head. Make your
heart your primary guide! Not your mind. Meet, challenge, and ultimately prevail over your nafs with
your heart. Knowing your ego will lead you to the knowledge of God.
It had taken me years to finish working on these rules. All forty of them. And now that I was done, I
knew I was nearing the final stage of my time in this world. Lately I had been having many visions in this
direction. It wasn’t death that worried me, for I didn’t see it as an end, but dying without leaving a legacy
behind. There were many words piled up inside my chest, stories waiting to be told. I wanted to hand all
this knowledge to one other person, neither a master nor a disciple. I sought an equal—a companion.
“God,” I whispered into the dark, damp room, “all my life I traveled the world and followed Thy path.
I saw every person as an open book, a walking Qur’an. I stayed away from the ivory towers of scholars,
preferring to spend time with outcasts, expatriates, and exiles. Now I am bursting. Help me to hand Thy
wisdom to the right person. Then Thou can do with me as Thou wish.”
Before my eyes the room was showered with a light so bright that the faces of the travelers in their
beds turned lurid blue. The air inside smelled fresh and alive, as if all the windows had been pushed open
and a gusty wind brought in the scent of lilies and jasmine from faraway gardens.
“Go to Baghdad,” fluted my guardian angel in a singsong voice.
“What is awaiting me in Baghdad?” I asked.
“You prayed for a companion, and a companion you will be given. In Baghdad you will find the master
who will point you in the right direction.”
Tears of gratitude welled up in my eyes. Now I knew that the man in my vision was no other than my
spiritual companion. Sooner or later we were destined to meet. And when we did, I would learn why his
kind hazel eyes were eternally sad and how I came to be murdered on an early-spring night.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, MAY 19, 2008
Before the sun had set and the children had come back home, Ella placed a bookmark in the manuscript
and put Sweet Blasphemy aside. Curious about the man who had written the novel, she went online and
Googled “A. Z. Zahara,” wondering what would pop up but not expecting much.
To her surprise, a personal blog appeared. The colors on the page were predominantly amethyst and
turquoise, and on top of the page a male figure with a long white skirt whirled slowly. Having never seen
a whirling dervish before, Ella took a careful look at the picture. The blog was titled An Eggshell Named
Life, and beneath it there was a poem with the same title:
Let us choose one another as companions!
Let us sit at each other’s feet!
Inwardly we have many harmonies—think not
That we are only what we see.
The page was full of postcards from cities and sites all around the world. Underneath each postcard there
were comments about that particular place. It was while reading these that Ella came across three pieces
of information that immediately drew her attention: First, that the A in A. Z. Zahara stood for Aziz.
Second, that Aziz regarded himself as a Sufi. Third, that at the moment he was traveling somewhere in
Guatemala.
In another section there were samples of the photos he had taken. Most were portraits of people of all
colors and stripes. Despite their stark differences, they resembled one another in one curious respect: All
the people in all the portraits had something visibly missing. For some the missing element was a simple
thing, like an earring, a shoe, or a button, while for others it was much more substantial, like a tooth, a
finger, or sometimes a leg. Underneath the photos it read:
No matter who we are or where we live, deep inside we all feel incomplete. It’s like we have lost something and need to get it
back. Just what that something is, most of us never find out. And of those who do, even fewer manage to go out and look for it.
Ella scrolled up and down the Web page, clicked on every postcard to enlarge it, and read every comment
Aziz had made. At the bottom of the page, there was an e-mail address, azizZzahara@gmail.com, which
she wrote down on a piece of paper. Next to that she found a poem by Rumi:
Choose Love, Love! Without the sweet life of
Love, living is a burden—as you have seen.
It was while reading this poem that a most peculiar thought flashed across her mind. For a fleeting
moment, it felt as if everything Aziz Z. Zahara included in his personal blog—the pictures, the comments,
the quotations, and the poems—were written for her eyes only. It was a strange and slightly supercilious
thought, but one that made perfect sense to her.
Later in the afternoon, Ella sat by the window, feeling tired and slightly down, the sun heavy on her back
and the air in the kitchen filled with the smells of the brownies she was baking. She had Sweet Blasphemy
open in front of her, but her mind was so preoccupied she couldn’t concentrate on the manuscript. It
occurred to her that perhaps she, too, should write her own set of ground rules. She could name it The
Forty Rules of the Deeply Settled, Earthy Housewife.
“Rule Number One,” she murmured. “Stop looking for love! Stop running after impossible dreams!
There are surely more important things in life for a married woman about to be forty.”
But her own joke produced an obscure discomfort in Ella, reminding her of bigger worries. Unable to
hold herself back anymore, she gave her elder daughter a call. She got her answering machine.
“Jeannette, dear, I know it was wrong of me to call Scott. But my intentions weren’t bad. I just wanted
to make sure …”
She paused, deeply regretting not planning this message in advance. She could hear the soft rustle of the
answering machine recording in the background. It made her nervous to think that the tape was rolling and
time was running short.
“Jeannette, I’m sorry for the things I do. I know I shouldn’t complain when I’m so blessed. But it’s just
that I’m so … unhappy—”
Click. The answering machine came to a stop. Ella’s heart constricted with the shock of what she’d just
said. What had come over her? She hadn’t known she was unhappy. Was it possible to be depressed and
not know it? Oddly enough, she didn’t feel unhappy about confessing her unhappiness. She hadn’t been
feeling much of anything lately.
Her gaze slid to the piece of paper on which she’d written Aziz Z. Zahara’s e-mail address. The
address looked simple, unpretentious, and somehow inviting. Without giving it much thought, she went to
her computer and started composing an e-mail:
Dear Aziz Z. Zahara,
My name is Ella. I am reading your novel Sweet Blasphemy in my capacity as a reader for the literary agency. I have only just begun,
and I am enjoying it immensely. This, however, is my personal opinion and is not reflective of the views of my boss. Whether I like your
novel or not, I have barely any influence on the final decision as to whether we will take you on as a client.
It seems like you believe that love is the essence of life and that nothing else matters. It’s not my intention to get into a fruitless
debate with you on this matter. Suffice it to say that I do not completely agree. But this is not why I am writing to you.
I am writing because the “timing” of my reading Sweet Blasphemy couldn’t have been more bizarre. Currently I am trying to
persuade my elder daughter not to marry so young. The day before, I asked her boyfriend to call off their marriage plans. Now my
daughter hates me and refuses to talk to me. I have a feeling you two would get along well, as you seem to have very similar views on
love.
I am sorry to pour my personal problems out to you. That wasn’t my intention. Your personal blog (that is where I found your e-mail
address) says you are in Guatemala. Traveling around the world must be quite a thrill. If you happen to come to Boston, perhaps we
could meet in person and talk over a cup of coffee.
Best wishes,
Ella
Her first e-mail to Aziz was not a letter so much as an invitation, a cry for help. But Ella had no way of
knowing this as she sat in the silence of her kitchen and composed a note to an unknown writer she didn’t
expect to meet now or at any time in the future.
The Master
BAGHDAD, APRIL 1242
Baghdad took no note of the arrival of Shams of Tabriz, but I will never forget the day he came to our
modest dervish lodge. We had important guests that afternoon. The high judge had dropped by with a
group of his men, and I suspected there was more than cordiality behind his visit. Renowned for his
dislike of Sufism, the judge wanted to remind me that he kept an eye on us, just as he kept an eye on all the
Sufis in the area.
The judge was an ambitious man. He had a broad face, a sagging belly, and short, stubby fingers, each
with a precious ring. He had to stop eating so much, but I suspected that nobody had the courage to tell
him, not even his doctor. Coming from a long line of religious scholars, he was one of the most influential
men in the area. With one ruling he could send a man to the gallows, or he could just as easily pardon a
convict’s crimes, lifting him up from the darkest dungeons. Always dressed in fur coats and expensive
garments, he carried himself with the grandeur of someone who was sure of his authority. I did not
approve of his big ego, but for the well-being of our lodge I did my best to remain on good terms with this
man of influence.
“We live in the most magnificent city in the world,” the judge pronounced as he popped a fig into his
mouth. “Today Baghdad overflows with refugees running away from the Mongol army. We provide them
safe haven. This is the center of the world, don’t you think, Baba Zaman?”
“This city is a gem, no doubt,” I said carefully. “But let us not forget that cities are like human beings.
They are born, they go through childhood and adolescence, they grow old, and eventually they die. At this
moment in time, Baghdad is in its late youth. We are not as wealthy as we used to be at the time of Caliph
Harun ar-Rashid, though we can still take a measure of pride in being a center of trade, crafts, and poetry.
But who knows what the city will look like a thousand years from now? Everything might be different.”
“Such pessimism!” The judge shook his head as he reached out to another bowl and picked a date. “The
Abbasid rule will prevail, and we will prosper. That is, of course, if the status quo is not disrupted by the
traitors among us. There are those who call themselves Muslim, but their interpretation of Islam is far
more dangerous than threats from infidels.”
I chose to remain silent. It was no secret that the judge thought the mystics, with their individualistic
and esoteric interpretations of Islam, were troublemakers. He accused us of paying no heed to the sharia
and thus disrespecting the men of authority—men like him. Sometimes I had the feeling he would rather
have all Sufis kicked out of Baghdad.
“Your brotherhood is harmless, but don’t you think some Sufis are beyond the pale?” the judge asked,
stroking his beard.
I didn’t know how to respond to that. Thank God just then we heard a knock on the door. It was the
ginger-haired novice. He made a beeline toward me and whispered in my ear that we had a visitor, a
wandering dervish who insisted upon seeing me and refused to talk to anyone else.
Normally I would have asked the novice to take the newcomer to a quiet, welcoming room, give him
warm food, and make him wait until the guests had left. But as the judge was giving me a hard time, it
occurred to me that a wandering dervish could dispel the tension in the room by telling us colorful stories
from faraway lands. So I asked the novice to bring the man in.
A few minutes later, the door opened and in walked a man dressed head to toe in black. Lank, gaunt,
and of indeterminable age, he had a sharp nose, deeply set pitch-black eyes, and dark hair that fell over
his eyes in thick curls. He wore a long, hooded cloak, a wool garment, and sheepskin boots. There were a
number of charms around his neck. He held a wooden bowl in his hand of the sort that mendicant
dervishes carry to overcome their personal vanity and hubris by accepting the charity of others. I realized
that here was a man who did not pay much attention to the judgments of society. That people could
confuse him with some vagrant, or even a beggar, didn’t seem to bother him in the least.
As soon as I saw him standing there, awaiting permission to introduce himself, I sensed he was
different. It was in his eyes, in his elaborate gestures, written all over him. Like an acorn that might seem
modest and vulnerable to ignorant eyes but already heralds the proud oak tree that it will turn out to be, he
looked at me with those piercing black eyes and nodded silently.
“Welcome to our lodge, dervish,” I said as I motioned for him to take a seat on the cushions across
from me.
After greeting everyone, the dervish sat down, inspecting the people in the room, taking in every detail.
Finally his gaze stopped at the judge. The two men looked at each other for a full minute, without so much
as a word, and I couldn’t help wondering what each thought of the other, as they seemed so very opposite.
I offered the dervish warm goat milk, sweetened figs, and filled dates, all of which he politely refused.
When asked his name, he introduced himself as Shams of Tabriz and said he was a wandering dervish
searching for God high and low.
“And were you able to find Him?” I inquired.
A shadow crossed his face as the dervish nodded and said, “Indeed, He was with me all along.”
The judge interjected with a smirk he didn’t bother to hide, “I never understand why you dervishes
make life so complicated. If God was with you all along, why did you rummage around this whole time in
search of Him?”
Shams of Tabriz bowed his head pensively and remained silent for a moment. When he looked up
again, his face was calm, his voice measured. “Because although it is a fact that He cannot be found by
seeking, only those who seek can find Him.”
“Such wordplay,” the judge scoffed. “Are you trying to tell us that we cannot find God if we stay in the
same place all our lives? That’s nonsense. Not everyone needs to dress in tatters and hit the road like
you!”
There followed a ripple of laughter as the men in the room were eager to show their agreement with the
judge—high-pitched, unconfident, and unhappy laughs from people used to toadying to superiors. I felt
uneasy. Obviously it hadn’t been a good idea to bring the judge and the dervish together.
“Perhaps I was misunderstood. I didn’t mean to say one could not find God if he stayed in his
hometown. That is certainly possible,” conceded the dervish. “There are people who have never traveled
anywhere and yet have seen the world.”
“Exactly!” The judge grinned triumphantly—a grin that vanished upon hearing what the dervish uttered
next.
“What I meant to say, Judge, was that one could not find God if he stayed in the fur coat, silk garment,
and pricey jewelry that you are wearing today.”
A stunned silence descended upon the room, the sounds and sighs around us dissolving down to dust.
We all held our breath, as if expecting something bigger to happen, though what could have been more
shocking, I didn’t know.
“Your tongue is too sharp for a dervish,” the judge said.
“When something needs to be said, I’ll say it even if the whole world grabs me by the neck and tells me
to keep quiet.”
This was met with a frown from the judge, but then he shrugged dismissively. “Well, whatever,” he
said. “In any case, you are the man we need. We were just talking about the splendor of our city. You must
have seen many places. Is there a place more charming than Baghdad?”
Softly, his gaze moving from one man to another, Shams explained, “There is no question Baghdad is a
remarkable city, but no beauty on earth lasts forever. Cities are erected on spiritual columns. Like giant
mirrors, they reflect the hearts of their residents. If those hearts darken and lose faith, cities will lose their
glamour. It happens, and it happens all the time.”
I couldn’t help but nod. Shams of Tabriz turned to me, momentarily distracted from his thoughts, with a
friendly flicker in his eyes. I felt them on me like the heat of a sweltering sun. That was when I clearly
saw how he merited his name. This man was radiating vigor and vitality and burning within, like a ball of
fire. He was indeed Shams, “the sun.”
But the judge was of a different mind. “You Sufis make everything too complicated. The same with
philosophers and poets! Why the need for so many words? Human beings are simple creatures with
simple needs. It falls upon the leaders to see to their needs and make sure they do not go astray. That
requires applying the sharia to perfection.”
“The sharia is like a candle,” said Shams of Tabriz. “It provides us with much valuable light. But let us
not forget that a candle helps us to go from one place to another in the dark. If we forget where we are
headed and instead concentrate on the candle, what good is it?”
The judge grimaced, his face closing up. I felt a wave of anxiety wash over me. Entering into a
discussion about the significance of the sharia with a man whose job was to judge, and often punish,
people according to the sharia was swimming in dangerous waters. Didn’t Shams know that?
Just as I was looking for an appropriate excuse to take the dervish out of the room, I heard him say,
“There is a rule that applies to this situation.”
“What rule?” asked the judge suspiciously.
Shams of Tabriz straightened up, his gaze fixed as if reading from an invisible book, and he
pronounced:
“Each and every reader comprehends the Holy Qur’an on a different level in tandem with the depth
of his understanding. There are four levels of insight. The first level is the outer meaning and it is the
one that the majority of the people are content with. Next is the Batm—the inner level. Third, there is
the inner of the inner. And the fourth level is so deep it cannot be put into words and is therefore
bound to remain indescribable.”
With glinting eyes Shams continued. “Scholars who focus on the sharia know the outer meaning. Sufis
know the inner meaning. Saints know the inner of the inner. And as for the fourth level, that is known only
by prophets and those closest to God.”
“Are you telling me that an ordinary Sufi has a deeper grasp of the Qur’an than a sharia scholar?” the
judge asked as he tapped his fingers on the bowl.
A subtle, sardonic smile curved the dervish’s mouth, but he didn’t answer.
“Be careful, my friend,” the judge said. “There is a thin line between where you stand and sheer
blasphemy.”
If there was a threat in these words, the dervish seemed not to have noticed it. “What exactly is ‘sheer
blasphemy’?” he asked, and then with a sharp intake of breath he added, “Allow me to tell you a story.”
And here is what he told us:
One day Moses was walking in the mountains on his own when he saw a shepherd in the distance.
The man was on his knees with his hands spread out to the sky, praying. Moses was delighted. But
when he got closer, he was equally stunned to hear the shepherd’s prayer.
“Oh, my beloved God, I love Thee more than Thou can know. I will do anything for Thee, just say
the word. Even if Thou asked me to slaughter the fattest sheep in my flock in Thy name, I would do so
without hesitation. Thou would roast it and put its tail fat in Thy rice to make it more tasty.”
Moses inched toward the shepherd, listening attentively.
“Afterward I would wash Thy feet and clean Thine ears and pick Thy lice for Thee. That is how
much I love Thee.”
Having heard enough, Moses interrupted the shepherd, yelling, “Stop, you ignorant man! What do
you think you are doing? Do you think God eats rice? Do you think God has feet for you to wash? This
is not prayer. It is sheer blasphemy.”
Dazed and ashamed, the shepherd apologized repeatedly and promised to pray as decent people did.
Moses taught him several prayers that afternoon. Then he went on his way, utterly pleased with
himself.
But that night Moses heard a voice. It was God’s.
“Oh, Moses, what have you done? You scolded that poor shepherd and failed to realize how dear he
was to Me. He might not be saying the right things in the right way, but he was sincere. His heart was
pure and his intentions good. I was pleased with him. His words might have been blasphemy to your
ears, but to Me they were sweet blasphemy.”
Moses immediately understood his mistake. The next day, early in the morning, he went back to the
mountains to see the shepherd. He found him praying again, except this time he was praying in the way
he had been instructed. In his determination to get the prayer right, he was stammering, bereft of the
excitement and passion of his earlier prayer. Regretting what he had done to him, Moses patted the
shepherd’s back and said: “My friend, I was wrong. Please forgive me. Keep praying in your own way.
That is more precious in God’s eyes.”
The shepherd was astonished to hear this, but even deeper was his relief. Nevertheless, he did not
want to go back to his old prayers. Neither did he abide by the formal prayers that Moses had taught
him. He had now found a new way of communicating with God. Though satisfied and blessed in his
naïve devotion, he was now past that stage—beyond his sweet blasphemy.
“So you see, don’t judge the way other people connect to God,” concluded Shams. “To each his own
way and his own prayer. God does not take us at our word. He looks deep into our hearts. It is not the
ceremonies or rituals that make a difference, but whether our hearts are sufficiently pure or not.”
I checked the judge’s face. I could see beneath his mask of absolute confidence and composure that he
was clearly annoyed. Yet at the same time, being the astute man that he was, he had detected a tricky
situation. If he reacted to Shams’s story, he would have to take the next step and punish him for his
insolence, in which case things would get serious and everybody would hear that a simple dervish had
dared to confront the high judge. It was therefore better for him to pretend there was nothing to be upset
about and leave it there.
Outside, the sun was setting, painting the sky a dozen shades of crimson, punctuated now and again by
dark gray clouds. In a little while, the judge rose to his feet, saying he had some important business to
attend to. After giving me a slight nod and Shams of Tabriz a cold stare, he strode off. His men followed
wordlessly.
“I am afraid the judge didn’t like you much,” I said when everyone had left.
Shams of Tabriz brushed his hair from his face, smiling. “Oh, that is quite all right. I am used to people
not liking me much.”
I couldn’t help feeling excited. I had been the master of this lodge long enough to know that it was not
often such a visitor came.
“Tell me, dervish,” I said, “what brings someone like you to Baghdad?”
I was eager to hear his answer but also strangely fearful of it.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, MAY 20, 2008
Belly dancers and dervishes spun in Ella’s dream on the night her husband didn’t come home. Her head
resting on the manuscript, she watched as rough-looking warriors dined at a roadside inn, their plates
piled high with delicious pies and desserts.
Then she saw herself. She was searching for someone in a bustling bazaar in a citadel in a foreign
country. All around her, people moved slowly, as if dancing to a tune she couldn’t hear. She stopped a fat
man with a drooping mustache to ask something, only she couldn’t remember the question. The man
looked at her blankly and hobbled away. She tried to talk to several vendors and then shoppers, but no
one responded to her. At first she thought it was because she couldn’t speak their language. Then she put
her hand to her mouth and realized with horror that her tongue had been cut off. With increasing panic she
looked around for a mirror to see her reflection and figure out if she was still the same person, but there
was none in the bazaar. She started to cry and woke up to a disturbing sound, not knowing whether she
still had a tongue.
When Ella opened her eyes, she found Spirit frantically scratching at the back door. An animal had
probably gotten onto the porch, driving the dog crazy. Skunks made him particularly nervous. The memory
of his inopportune encounter with one last winter was still fresh. It had taken Ella weeks to remove that
nasty odor from the dog, and even after she’d washed him in tubs of tomato juice, the smell lingered,
reminiscent of burning rubber.
Ella glanced at the clock on the wall. It was a quarter to three in the morning. David was still not back,
and perhaps he never would be. Jeannette had not returned her call, and in her pessimistic state Ella
doubted she ever would. Seized by the terror of being abandoned by her husband and daughter, she
opened the fridge and looked through it for a few minutes. The desire to scoop out some cherry vanilla ice
cream warred with the fear of gaining weight. With no small effort, she took a step away from the fridge
and slammed the door, a bit more harshly than necessary.
Then Ella opened a bottle of red wine and poured herself a glass. It was good wine, light and lively,
with an underlying hint of bittersweetness that she liked. Only when she was filling the second glass did it
occur to her she might have opened one of David’s expensive Bordeaux. She checked the label—Château
Margaux 1996. Not knowing what to make of that, she frowned at the bottle.
She was too tired and too sleepy to read anymore. So she decided to check her e-mail. There, among
half a dozen junk e-mails and a message from Michelle inquiring about how the manuscript was going, she
found an e-mail from Aziz Z. Zahara.
Dear Ella (if I may),
Your e-mail found me in a village in Guatemala called Momostenango. It’s one of the few places left where they still use a Mayan
calendar. Right across from my hostel, there is a wish tree bedecked with hundreds of pieces of fabric of every color and pattern you
can imagine. They call it The Tree of the Brokenhearted. Those with broken hearts write down their names on pieces of paper and tie
these to the branches, praying for their hearts to be healed.
I hope you won’t find this too presumptuous, but after reading your e-mail I went to the wish tree and prayed that you and your
daughter solve this misunderstanding. Even a speck of love should not go unappreciated, because, as Rumisaid, love is the water of life.
One thing that has helped me personally in the past was to stop interfering with the people around me and getting frustrated when I
couldn’t change them. Instead of intrusion or passivity, may I suggest submission?
Some people make the mistake of confusing “submission” with “weakness,” whereas it is anything but. Submission is a form of
peaceful acceptance of the terms of the universe, including the things we are currently unable to change or comprehend.
According to the Mayan calendar, today is an auspicious day. A major astrological shift is on its way, ushering in a new human
consciousness. I need to hurry to send you this e-mail before the sun sets and the day is over.
May love find you when you least expect, where you least expect.
Yours sincerely,
Aziz
Ella shut off the laptop, moved to learn that a complete stranger in a remote corner of the world had
prayed for her well-being. She closed her eyes and imagined her name written on a piece of paper tied to
a wish tree, dangling like a kite in the air, free and happy.
A few minutes later, she opened the kitchen door and stepped out into the backyard, enjoying the
unsettling coolness of the breeze. Spirit stood beside her, uneasy and growling, constantly sniffing the air.
The dog’s eyes grew small, then big and anxious, and his ears kept perking up, as if he had recognized in
the distance something scary. Ella and her dog stood side by side under the late-spring moon, staring into
the thick, vast darkness, similarly frightened of the things moving in the dark, frightened of the unknown.
The Novice
BAGHDAD, APRIL 1242
Bowing and scraping, I showed the judge to the door and quickly returned to the main room to collect the
dirty bowls. I was surprised to find Baba Zaman and the wandering dervish in the same position as when
I left them, neither one saying a word. Out of the corner of my eye, I checked them, wondering if it could
be possible to carry on a conversation without talking. I lingered there as long as I could, arranging the
cushions, tidying up the room, picking up the crumbs on the carpet, but after a while I ran out of reasons to
stay.
Halfheartedly, I dragged my feet back to the kitchen. As soon as he saw me, the cook started to rain
orders. “Wipe the counter, mop the floor! Wash the dishes! Scrub the stove and the walls around the grill!
And when you are done, don’t forget to check the mousetraps!” Ever since I’d come to this lodge some six
months ago, the cook had been riding roughshod over me. Every day he made me work like a dog and
called this torture part of my spiritual training, as if washing greasy dishes could be spiritual in any way.
A man of few words, the cook had one favorite mantra: “Cleaning is praying, praying is cleaning!”
“If that were true, all the housewives in Baghdad would have become spiritual masters,” I once dared
to say.
He threw a wooden spoon at my head and yelled at the top of his lungs, “Such back talk will get you
nowhere, son. If you want to become a dervish, be as mute as that wooden spoon. Rebelliousness is not a
good quality in a novice. Speak less, mature quicker!”
I hated the cook, but, more than that, I feared him. I had never disobeyed his orders. That is, until this
evening.
As soon as the cook turned his back, I sneaked out of the kitchen and tiptoed to the main room again,
dying to learn more about the wandering dervish. Who was he? What was he doing here? He wasn’t like
the dervishes in the lodge. His eyes looked fierce and unruly, even when he bowed his head in modesty.
There was something so unusual and unpredictable about him that it was almost frightening.
I peeped through a crack in the door. At first I couldn’t see anything. But soon my eyes adjusted to the
semidarkness inside the room and I could make out their faces.
I heard the master ask, “Tell me, Shams of Tabriz, what brings someone like you to Baghdad? Have
you seen this place in a dream?”
The dervish shook his head. “No, it wasn’t a dream that brought me here. It was a vision. I never have
dreams.”
“Everybody has dreams,” Baba Zaman said tenderly. “It’s just that you might not remember them all the
time. But that doesn’t mean you don’t dream.”
“But I do not,” the dervish insisted. “It is part of a deal I made with God. You see, when I was a boy, I
saw angels and watched the mysteries of the universe unfold before my eyes. When I told this to my
parents, they weren’t pleased and told me to stop dreaming. When I confided in my friends, they, too, said
I was a hopeless dreamer. I tried talking to my teachers, but their response was no different. Finally I
understood that whenever people heard something unusual, they called it a dream. I began to dislike the
word and all that it represented.”
Upon saying this, the dervish paused as if he had heard a sudden sound. Then the strangest thing
happened. He stood up, straightened his spine, and slowly, deliberately began to walk toward the door,
all the while looking in my direction. It was as if he somehow knew I was spying on them.
It was as if he could see through the wooden door.
My heart pounded like mad. I wanted to run back to the kitchen but couldn’t see how. My arms, my
legs, my whole body froze. Through and beyond the door, the dark eyes of Shams of Tabriz were fixed
upon me. As terrified as I was, I also felt a tremendous amount of energy rushing through my body. He
approached, put his hand on the door handle, but just when I thought he was about to open the door and
catch me, he stopped. I couldn’t see his face from this close and had no idea what had changed his mind.
We waited like that for an unbearably long minute. Then he turned his back, and as he paced away from
the door, he continued with his story.
“When I got a little older, I asked God to take away my ability to dream, so that every time I
encountered Him, I would know I wasn’t dreaming. He agreed. He took them all away. That’s why I never
dream.”
Shams of Tabriz now stood by the open windows across the room. Outside, there was a light drizzle,
and he watched it pensively before he said, “God took away my ability to dream. But to compensate for
that loss, He allowed me to interpret the dreams of others. I am a dream interpreter.”
I expected Baba Zaman not to believe this nonsense and to scold him, as he scolds me all the time.
But instead the master nodded respectfully and said, “You seem to be an unusual person. Tell me, what
can I do for you?”
“I don’t know. Actually, I was hoping you could tell me that.”
“What do you mean?” asked the master, sounding puzzled.
“For almost forty years, I have been a wandering dervish. I am skilled in the ways of nature, although
the ways of society are still alien to me. If necessary, I can fight like a wild animal, but I myself cannot
hurt anyone. I can name the constellations in the sky, identify the trees in the forests, and read like an open
book the types of people the Almighty has created in His image.”
Shams paused briefly and waited as the master lit an oil lamp. Then he continued. “One of the rules
says, You can study God through everything and everyone in the universe, because God is not confined
in a mosque, synagogue, or church. But if you are still in need of knowing where exactly His abode is,
there is only one place to look for Him: in the heart of a true lover. There is no one who has lived after
seeing Him, just like there is no one who has died after seeing Him. Whoever finds Him will remain with
Him forever.”
In that dim, flickering light, Shams of Tabriz seemed even taller, his hair falling to his shoulders in
disorderly waves.
“But knowledge is like brackish water at the bottom of an old vase unless it flows somewhere. For
years I prayed to God for a companion to share the knowledge accumulated inside me. Finally, in a vision
in Samarkand, I’ve been told I should come to Baghdad to fulfill my destiny. I understand that you know
the name of my companion and his whereabouts and will tell me, if not now, then later.”
Outside, the night had settled, and a wedge of moonlight streamed in through the open windows. I
realized how late it was. The cook must have been looking for me. But I didn’t care. For once it felt good
to break the rules.
“I don’t know what kind of answer you are asking of me,” murmured the master. “But if there is a piece
of information I am destined to reveal, I know it will happen in due time. Until then you can stay here with
us. Be our guest.”
Upon hearing this, the wandering dervish bowed humbly and gratefully to kiss Baba Zaman’s hand.
That is when the master asked that bizarre question: “You say you are ready to deliver all your knowledge
to another person. You want to hold the Truth in your palm as if it were a precious pearl and offer it to
someone special. But opening up someone’s heart to spiritual light is no small task for a human being.
You’re stealing God’s thunder. What are you willing to pay in return?”
For as long as I live, I will never forget the answer the dervish gave then. Raising an eyebrow, he said
firmly, “I am willing to give my head.”
I flinched, feeling a cold shiver travel down my spine. When I put my eye to the crack again, I noticed
that the master looked shaken by the answer as well.
“Perhaps we have done enough talking for today.” Baba Zaman exhaled a sigh. “You must be tired. Let
me call the young novice. He will show you to your bed and provide clean sheets and a glass of milk.”
Now Shams of Tabriz turned toward the door, and I felt down to my bones that he was gazing at me
again. More than that. It was as if he were looking through and into me, studying the pits and peaks of my
soul, inspecting secrets that were hidden even from me. Perhaps he was involved with black magic or had
been trained by Harut and Marut, the two angels of Babylon that the Qur’an warned us against. Or else he
possessed supernatural talents that helped him to see through doors and walls. Either way he scared me.
“No need to call the novice,” he said, his voice attaining a higher pitch. “I’ve a feeling he is nearby and
has already heard us.”
I let out a gasp so loud it might have woken the dead in their graves. In utter panic I jumped to my feet
and scurried into the garden, seeking refuge in the dark. But an unpleasant surprise was awaiting me there.
“So there you are, you little rascal!” yelled the cook as he ran toward me with a broom in his hand.
“You are in big trouble, son, big trouble!”
I jumped aside and managed to duck the broom at the last minute.
“Come here or I’ll break your legs!” the cook shouted behind me, puffing.
But I didn’t. Instead I dashed out of the garden as fast as an arrow. While the face of Shams of Tabriz
shimmered before my eyes, I ran and ran along the winding trail that connected the lodge to the main road,
and even after I had gotten far away, I couldn’t stop running. My heart pounding, my throat dried up, I ran
until my knees gave out and I could run no more.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, MAY 21, 2008
Braced for a quarrel, David came home early the next morning, only to find Ella asleep in bed with Sweet
Blasphemy open on her lap and an empty glass of wine by her side. He took a step toward her to pull her
blanket up a little and make sure she was snugly covered, but then he changed his mind.
Ten minutes later, Ella woke up. She wasn’t surprised to hear him in the bathroom taking a shower. Her
husband could flirt with other women, and apparently even spend the night with them, but he would rather
not take his morning shower anywhere other than his own bathroom. When David finished and walked
back through the room, Ella pretended to be asleep, thus saving him from having to explain his absence.
Less than an hour later, both her husband and the kids had left, and Ella was in the kitchen alone. Life
seemed to have resumed its regular course. She opened her favorite cookbook, Culinary Artistry Made
Plain and Easy, and after considering several options chose a fairly demanding menu that would keep her
busy all afternoon:
Clam Chowder with Saffron, Coconut, and Oranges
Pasta Baked with Mushrooms, Fresh Herbs, and Five Cheeses
Rosemary-Infused Veal Spareribs with Vinegar and Roasted Garlic
Lime-Bathed Green Bean and Cauliflower Salad
Then she decided on a dessert: Warm Chocolate Soufflé.
There were many reasons that Ella liked cooking. Creating a delicious meal out of ordinary ingredients
was not only gratifying and fulfilling but also strangely sensual. But more than that, she enjoyed cooking
because it was something she was really good at. Besides, it quieted her mind. The kitchen was the one
place in her life where she could avoid the outside world altogether and stop the flow of time within
herself. For some people sex might have the same effect, she imagined, but that always required two,
whereas to cook all one needed was time, care, and a bag of groceries.
People who cooked on TV programs made it sound as if cooking was about inspiration, originality, and
creativity. Their favorite word was “experimenting.” Ella disagreed. Why not leave experimenting to
scientists and quirkiness to artists! Cooking was about learning the basics, following the instructions, and
being respectful of the wisdom of ages. All you had to do was use time-honored traditions, not
experiment with them. Cooking skills came from customs and conventions, and although it was clear that
the modern age belittled such things, there was nothing wrong with being traditional in the kitchen.
Ella also cherished her daily routines. Every morning, at roughly the same time, the family had
breakfast; every weekend they went to the same mall; and on the first Sunday of every month they had a
dinner party with their neighbors. Because David was a workaholic with little time on his hands, Ella
was in charge of everything at home: managing the finances, caring for the house, reupholstering the
furniture, running errands, arranging the kids’ schedules and helping them with their homework, and so on.
On Thursdays she went to the Fusion Cooking Club, where the members merged the cuisines of different
countries and freshened up age-old recipes with new spices and ingredients. Every Friday she spent hours
at the farmers’ market, chatting with the farmers about their products, inspecting a jar of low-sugar
organic peach jam, or explaining to another shopper how best to cook baby portabella mushrooms.
Whatever she hadn’t been able to find, she picked up from the Whole Foods Market on the way home.
Then, on Saturday evenings, David took Ella out to a restaurant (usually Thai or Japanese), and if they
weren’t too tired or drunk or simply not in the mood when they came home, they would have sex. Brief
kisses and tender moves that exuded less passion than compassion. Once their most reliable connection,
sex had lost its allure quite a while ago. Sometimes they went for weeks without making love. Ella found
it odd that sex had once been so important in her life, and now when it was gone, she felt relieved, almost
liberated. By and large she was fine with the idea of a long-married couple gradually abandoning the
plane of physical attraction for a more reliable and stable way of relating.
The only problem was that David hadn’t abandoned sex as much as he had abandoned sex with his
wife. She had never confronted him openly about his affairs, not even hinting of her suspicions. The fact
that none of their close friends knew anything made it easier for her to feign ignorance. There were no
scandals, no embarrassing coincidences, nothing to set tongues wagging. She didn’t know how he
managed it, given the frequency of his couplings with other women, particularly with his young assistants,
but her husband handled things deftly and quietly. However, infidelity had a smell. That much Ella knew.
If there was a chain of events, Ella couldn’t tell which came first and which followed later. Had her
loss of interest in sex been the cause of her husband’s cheating? Or was it the other way round? Had
David cheated on her first, and then she’d neglected her body and lost her sexual desire?
Either way the outcome remained the same: The glow between them, the light that had helped them to
navigate the uncharted waters of marriage, keeping their desire afloat, even after three kids and twenty
years, was simply not there anymore.
For the next three hours, her mind was filled with thoughts while her hands were restless. She chopped
tomatoes, minced garlic, sautéed onions, simmered sauce, grated orange peels, and kneaded dough for a
loaf of whole-wheat bread. That last was based on the golden advice David’s mother had given her when
they got engaged.
“Nothing reminds a man of home like the smell of freshly baked bread,” she had said. “Never buy your
bread. Bake it yourself, honey. It will work wonders.”
Working the entire afternoon, Ella set an exquisite table with matching napkins, scented candles, and a
bouquet of yellow and orange flowers so bright and striking they looked almost artificial. For the final
touch, she added sparkly napkin rings. When she was done, the dining table resembled those found in
stylish home magazines.
Tired but satisfied, she turned on the kitchen TV to the local news. A young therapist had been stabbed
in her apartment, an electrical short had caused a fire in a hospital, and four high-school students had been
arrested for vandalism. She watched the news, shaking her head at the endless dangers looming in the
world. How could people like Aziz Z. Zahara find the desire and courage to travel the less-developed
parts of the globe when even the suburbs in America weren’t safe anymore?
Ella found it puzzling that an unpredictable and impenetrable world could drive people like her back
into their houses but had almost the opposite effect on someone like Aziz, inspiring him to embark on
adventures far off the beaten track.
The Rubinsteins sat at a picture-perfect table at 7:30 P.M., the burning candles giving the dining room a
sacred air. An outsider watching them might assume they were a perfect family, as graceful as the wisps
of smoke slowly dissolving in the air. Even Jeannette’s absence didn’t tarnish the picture. They ate while
Orly and Avi prattled on about the day’s events at school. For once Ella felt grateful to them for being so
chatty and noisy and covering up the silence that would otherwise have rested heavily between her and
her husband.
Out of the corner of her eye, Ella watched David jab his fork into a cauliflower and chew slowly. Her
gaze dropped to his thin, pale lips and pearl-white teeth—the mouth she knew so well and had kissed so
many times. She visualized him kissing another woman. For some reason the rival who appeared in her
mind’s eye was not David’s young secretary but a big-bosomed version of Susan Sarandon. Athletic and
confident, she showed off her breasts in a tight dress and wore high-heeled, knee-high red leather boots,
her face shiny, almost iridescent with too much makeup. Ella imagined David kissing this woman with
haste and hunger, not at all the way he chewed his cauliflower at the family table.
It was then and there, while having her Culinary Artistry Made Plain and Easy dinner and imagining
the woman her husband was having an affair with, that something inside Ella snapped. She understood
with chilling clarity and calm that despite her inexperience and timidity, one day she would abandon it
all: her kitchen, her dog, her children, her neighbors, her husband, her cookbooks and homemade-bread
recipes.… She would simply walk out into the world where dangerous things happened all the time.
The Master
BAGHDAD, JANUARY 26, 1243
Being part of a dervish lodge requires far more patience than Shams of Tabriz possesses. Yet nine months
have passed, and he is still with us.
In the beginning I expected him to pack up and leave at any moment, so visible was his aversion to a
strictly ordered life. I could see that it bored him stiff to have to sleep and wake up at the same hours, eat
regular meals, and conform to the same routine as everyone else. He was used to flying as a lonely bird,
wild and free. I suspect several times he came close to running away. Nevertheless, great as his need for
solitude, even greater was his commitment to finding his companion. Shams firmly believed that one of
these days I would come up with the information he needed and tell him where to go, whom to find. With
this faith he stayed.
During these nine months, I watched him closely, wondering if time flowed differently for him, more
rapidly and intensely. What took other dervishes months, sometimes years, to learn took him only weeks,
if not days. He had a remarkable curiosity about everything new and unusual and was a great observer of
nature. So many days I found him in the garden admiring the symmetry of a spiderweb or the dewdrops
glistening on a night-blooming flower. Insects, plants, and animals seemed more interesting and inspiring
to him than books and manuscripts. But just when I would start thinking he had no interest in reading, I
would find him immersed in an age-old book. Then, once again, he could go for weeks on end without
reading and studying anything.
When I asked him about this, he said one should keep the intellect satisfied and yet be careful not to
spoil it. It was one of his rules. “Intellect and love are made of different materials,” he said. “Intellect
ties people in knots and risks nothing, but love dissolves all tangles and risks everything. Intellect is
always cautious and advises, ‘Beware too much ecstasy,’ whereas love says, ‘Oh, never mind! Take the
plunge!’ Intellect does not easily break down, whereas love can effortlessly reduce itself to rubble. But
treasures are hidden among ruins. A broken heart hides treasures.”
As I got to know him better, I admired his audacity and acumen. But I also suspected there was a
downside to Shams’s unrivaled ingenuity and originality. For one thing, he was straightforward to the
point of brusqueness. I taught my dervishes never to see the faults of other people and, if they did, to be
forgiving and quiet. Shams, however, let no mistake go unnoticed. Whenever he saw anything wrong, he
spoke out about it right away, never beating around the bush. His honesty offended others, but he liked to
provoke people to see what came out of them in moments of anger.
Forcing him to do ordinary tasks was difficult. He had little patience for such jobs and lost interest in
something as soon as he got the hang of it. When it came to a routine, he got desperate, like a tiger trapped
in a cage. If a conversation bored him or somebody made a foolish remark, he got up and left, never
losing time with pleasantries. Values cherished by most human beings, such as security, comfort, and
happiness, had hardly any meaning in his eyes. And his distrust of words was so intense that often he went
without speaking for days. That, too, was one of his rules: Most of the problems of the world stem from
linguistic mistakes and simple misunderstandings. Don’t ever take words at face value. When you step
into the zone of love, language as we know it becomes obsolete. That which cannot be put into words
can only be grasped through silence.
In time I became concerned about his well-being. For deep inside I sensed that one who could burn so
fervently might have a tendency to put himself into dangerous situations.
At the end of the day, our fates are in the hands of God, and only He can tell when or how we each will
depart the world. For my part I decided to do my best to slow Shams down and accustom him, as much as
I could, to a more tranquil way of life. And for a while I thought I might succeed. But then came winter,
and with the winter came the messenger carrying a letter from afar.
That letter changed everything.
The Letter
FROM KAYSERI TO BAGHDAD, FEBRUARY 1243
Bismillahirrahmanirrahim,
My dear brother Baba Zaman,
May the peace and blessings of God be upon you.
It has been a long time since we have last seen one another, and I hope my letter finds you in good spirits. I have heard so many
wonderful things about the lodge you built on the outskirts of Baghdad, teaching dervishes the wisdom and love of God. I am writing this
letter in confidentiality to share with you something that has been preoccupying my mind. Allow me to start from the beginning.
As you know, the late Sultan Aladdin Keykubad was a remarkable man who excelled in leadership in difficult times. It had been his
dream to build a city where poets, artisans, and philosophers could live and work in peace. A dream many called impossible given the
chaos and hostility in the world, especially with the Crusaders and Mongols attacking from both sides. We have seen it all. Christians
killing Muslims, Christians killing Christians, Muslims killing Christians, Muslims killing Muslims. Warring religions, sects, tribes, even
brothers. But Keykubad was a determined leader. He chose the city of Konya—the first place to emerge after the great flood—to
realize his big dream.
Now, in Konya there lives a scholar you may or may not have heard of. His name is Mawlana Jalal ad-Din but he often goes by the
name Rumi. I have had the pleasure of meeting him, and not only that, of studying with him, first as his teacher, then, upon his father’s
death, as his mentor, and, after years, as his student. Yes, my friend, I became a student of my student. So talented and judicious was
he, after a point I had nothing else to teach him and started to learn from him instead. His father was a brilliant scholar, too. But Rumi
has a quality that very few scholars ever have: the ability to dig deep below the husk of religion and pull out from its core the gem that is
universal and eternal.
I want you to know that these are not solely my personal thoughts. When Rumi met the great mystic, druggist, and perfumist
Fariduddin Attar as a young man, Attar said of him, “This boy will open a gate in the heart of love and throw a flame into the hearts of
all mystic lovers.” Likewise when Ibn Arabi, the distinguished philosopher, writer, and mystic, saw the young Rumi walking behind his
father one day, he exclaimed, “Glory be to God, an ocean is walking behind a lake!”
As young as the age of twenty-four, Rumi became a spiritual leader. Today, thirteen years later, the residents of Konya look up to
him as a role model, and every Friday people from all over the region flock to the city to listen to his sermons. He has excelled at law,
philosophy, theology, astronomy, history, chemistry, and algebra. Already he is said to have ten thousand disciples. His followers hang
upon his every word and see him as a great enlightener who will generate a significant positive change in the history of Islam, if not in
the history of the world.
But to me Rumi has always been like a son. I promised his late father that I would always keep an eye on him. And now that I am
an old man who is nearing his final days, I want to make sure he is in the right company.
You see, as remarkable and successful as he no doubt is, Rumi himself has several times confided in me that he feels inwardly
dissatisfied. There is something missing in his life—an emptiness that neither his family nor his disciples can fill. Once I told him, though
he was anything but raw, he wasn’t burned either. His cup was full to the brim, and yet he needed to have the door to his soul opened
so that the waters of love could flow in and out. When he asked me how this could be done, I told him he needed a companion, a friend
of the path, and reminded him that the Qur’an says, “Believers are each other’s mirrors.”
Had the subject not come up again, I might have forgotten about it completely, but on the day I left Konya, Rumi came to me to ask
my opinion on a recurrent dream that had been bothering him. He told me that in his dream he was searching for someone in a big,
bustling city in a land far away. Words in Arabic. Delightful sunsets. Mulberry trees and silkworms waiting patiently in secretive
cocoons for their moment to arrive. Then he saw himself in the courtyard of his house, sitting by the well with a lantern in his hand,
weeping.
At the outset I had no idea what the fragments in his dreams indicated. Nothing seemed familiar. But then one day, after I had
received a silk scarf as a gift, the answer came to me and the riddle was solved. I remembered how you were fond of silk and
silkworms. I recalled the wonderful things I had heard about your tariqa. And it dawned upon me that the place Rumi saw in his
dreams was none other than your dervish lodge. In short, my brother, I can’t help wondering whether Rumi’s companion lives under
your roof. Hence the reason I write this letter.
I don’t know if there is such a person in your lodge. But if there is, I leave it in your hands to inform him about the destiny that
awaits him. If you and I can play even a minute role in helping two rivers meet and flow into the ocean of Divine Love as one single
watercourse, if we can help two good friends of God to meet, I will count myself blessed.
There is, however, one thing you need to take into consideration. Rumi might be an influential man adored and respected by many,
but that doesn’t mean he does not have critics. He does. Furthermore, such a flowing-together might generate discontent and opposition
and cause rivalries beyond our comprehension. His fondness of his companion might also cause problems in his family and inner circle.
The person who is openly loved by someone who is admired by so many people is bound to draw the envy, if not the hatred, of others.
All of this might put the companion of Rumi in unpredictable danger. In other words, my brother, the person you send to Konya
might never make it back. Therefore, before reaching a decision as to how to reveal this letter to Rumi’s companion, I ask you to give
the matter considerable thought.
I am sorry to put you in a difficult position, but as we both know, God never burdens us with more than we can bear. I look forward
to your answer and trust that whatever the outcome, you will take the right steps in the right direction.
May the light of faith never cease to shine upon you and your dervishes,
Master Seyyid Burhaneddin
Shams
BAGHDAD, DECEMBER 18, 1243
Beyond dangling icicles and snow-covered roads, a messenger appeared in the distance. He said he came
from Kayseri, and caused a stir among the dervishes, who knew visitors to be scarcer than sweet summer
grapes at this time of the year. A messenger with a message urgent enough to be carried through
snowstorms could only mean one of two things: Either something terrible had happened or something
important was about to happen.
The arrival of the messenger set tongues wagging in the dervish lodge, as everyone was curious about
the content of the letter handed to the master. But, shrouded in a cloak of mystery, he gave no hints
whatsoever. Stolid and ruminant, and zealously guarded, for days he bore the expression of a man
struggling with his conscience, finding it hard to reach the right decision.
During that time it wasn’t sheer curiosity that prompted me to closely observe Baba Zaman. Deep
inside, I sensed that the letter concerned me personally, although in what way I could not tell. I spent many
evenings in the praying room reciting the ninety-nine names of God for guidance. Each time one name
stood out: al-Jabbar—the One in whose dominion nothing happens except that which He has willed.
In the following days, while everyone in the lodge was making wild speculations, I spent my time alone
in the garden, observing Mother Nature now cuddled under a heavy blanket of snow. Finally one day we
heard the copper bell in the kitchen ring repeatedly, calling us all for an urgent meeting. Upon entering the
main room in the khaneqah, I found everyone present there, novices and senior dervishes alike, sitting in
a wide circle. And in the middle of the circle was the master, his lips neatly pursed, his eyes hazy.
After clearing his throat, he said, “Bismillah, you must be wondering why I summoned you here today.
It is about this letter I received. It doesn’t matter where it came from. Suffice it to say that it drew my
attention to a subject of great consequence.”
Baba Zaman paused briefly and stared out the window. He looked fatigued, thin, and pale, as if he had
aged considerably during these past days. But when he continued to speak, an unexpected determination
filled his voice.
“There lives an erudite scholar in a city not far away. He is good with words, but not so with
metaphors, for he is no poet. He is loved, respected, and admired by thousands, but he himself is not a
lover. Because of reasons far beyond me and you, someone from our lodge might have to go to meet him
and be his comrade.”
My heart tightened in my chest. I exhaled slowly, very slowly. I couldn’t help remembering one of the
rules. Loneliness and solitude are two different things. When you are lonely, it is easy to delude
yourself into believing that you are on the right path. Solitude is better for us, as it means being alone
without feeling lonely. But eventually it is best to find a person, the person who will be your mirror.
Remember, only in another person’s heart can you truly see yourself and the presence of God within
you.
The master continued. “I am here to ask if any one of you would like to volunteer for this spiritual
journey. I could just as well have appointed someone, but this is not a task that could be performed out of
duty. For it can be done only out of love and in the name of love.”
A young dervish asked permission to speak. “Who is this scholar, Master?”
“I can reveal his name only to the one who is willing to go.”
Upon hearing this, several dervishes raised their hands, excited and impatient. There were nine
candidates. I joined them, becoming the tenth. Baba Zaman waved his hand, gesturing at us to wait for him
to finish. “There is something else you should know before you make up your mind.”
With that, the master told us the journey was beset with great danger and unprecedented hardships, and
there was no guarantee of coming back. Instantly all the hands went down. Except mine.
Baba Zaman looked me straight in the eye for the first time in a long while, and as soon as his gaze met
mine, I understood he knew right from the start that I would be the only one to volunteer.
“Shams of Tabriz,” the master said slowly and dourly, as if my name left a heavy taste in his mouth. “I
respect your determination, but you are not fully a member of this order. You are our guest.”
“I don’t see how that could be a problem,” I said.
The master was silent for a long, reflective moment. Then, unexpectedly, he came to his feet and
concluded, “Let’s drop this subject for the time being. When spring comes, we will talk again.”
My heart rebelled. Though he knew that this mission was the sole reason I had come to Baghdad in the
first place, Baba Zaman was robbing me of the chance to fulfill my destiny.
“Why, Master? Why wait when I am ready to go this very moment? Just tell me the name of the city and
the scholar and I will be on my way!” I exclaimed.
But the master retorted in a cold, stern voice I wasn’t used to hearing from him, “There is nothing to
discuss. The meeting is over.”
It was a long, harsh winter. The garden was frozen stiff, and so were my lips. For the next three months, I
didn’t speak a word to anyone. Every day I took long walks in the countryside, hoping to see a tree in
blossom. But after snow came more snow. Spring wasn’t anywhere on the horizon. Still, as low-spirited
as I was outside, I remained grateful and hopeful inside, keeping in mind yet another rule. There was a
rule that suited my mood: Whatever happens in your life, no matter how troubling things might seem, do
not enter the neighborhood of despair. Even when all doors remain closed, God will open up a new
path only for you. Be thankful! It is easy to be thankful when all is well. A Sufi is thankful not only for
what he has been given but also for all that he has been denied.
Then finally one morning, I caught sight of a dazzling color, as delightful as a sweet song, sticking out
from under the piles of snow. It was a bush clover covered with tiny lavender flowers. My heart filled
with joy. As I walked back to the lodge, I ran into the ginger-haired novice and saluted him merrily. He
was so used to seeing me fixed in a grumpy silence that his jaw dropped.
“Smile, boy!” I yelled. “Don’t you see spring is in the air?”
From that day on, the landscape changed with remarkable speed. The last snow melted, the trees
budded, sparrows and wrens returned, and before long a faint spicy smell filled the air.
One morning we heard the copper bell ring again. I was the first to reach the main room this time. Once
again we sat in a wide circle around the master and listened to him talk about this prominent scholar of
Islam who knew everything, except the pits of love. Again no one else volunteered.
“I see that Shams is the only one to volunteer,” Baba Zaman announced, his voice rising in pitch and
thinning out like the howl of the wind. “But I’ll wait for autumn before reaching a decision.”
I was stunned. I could not believe that this was happening. Here I was, ready to leave after three long
months of postponement, and the master was telling me to put my journey off for another six months. With
a plunging heart, I protested and complained and begged the master to tell me the name of the city and the
scholar, but once again he refused.
This time, however, I knew it was going to be easier to wait, for there could be no further delays.
Having endured from winter to spring, I could hold my fire from spring to autumn. Baba Zaman’s
rejection had not disheartened me. If anything, it had raised my spirits, deepening my determination.
Another rule said, Patience does not mean to passively endure. It means to be farsighted enough to
trust the end result of a process. What does patience mean? It means to look at the thorn and see the
rose, to look at the night and see the dawn. Impatience means to be so shortsighted as to not be able to
see the outcome. The lovers of God never run out of patience, for they know that time is needed for the
crescent moon to become full.
When in autumn the copper bell rang for the third time, I walked in unhurriedly and confidently, trusting
that now things would finally be settled. The master looked paler and weaker than ever, as if he had no
more energy left in him. Nevertheless, when he saw me raise my hand again, he neither looked away nor
dropped the subject. Instead he gave me a determined nod.
“All right, Shams, there is no question you are the one who should embark on this journey. Tomorrow
morning you’ll be on your way, inshallah.”
I kissed the master’s hand. At long last I was going to meet my companion.
Baba Zaman smiled at me warmly and thoughtfully, the way a father smiles at his only son before
sending him to the battlefield. He then took out a sealed letter from inside his long khaki robe and, after
handing it to me, silently left the room. Everyone else followed suit. Alone in the room, I broke the wax
seal. Inside, there were two pieces of information written in graceful handwriting. The name of the city
and the scholar. Apparently I was going to Konya to meet a certain Rumi.
My heart skipped a beat. I had never heard his name before. He could be a famous scholar for all I
knew, but to me he was a complete mystery. One by one, I said the letters of his name: the powerful, lucid
R; the velvety U; the intrepid and self-confident M; and the mysterious I, yet to be solved.
Bringing the letters together, I repeated his name over and over again until the word melted on my
tongue with the sweetness of candy and became as familiar as “water,” “bread,” or “milk.”
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, MAY 22, 2008
Beneath her white duvet, Ella swallowed past a sore throat, feeling worn out. Staying up late and drinking
more than her usual limit several nights in a row had taken their toll. Still, she went downstairs to prepare
breakfast and sat at the table with her twins and her husband, doing her best to look interested in their
ongoing chatter about the coolest cars at school when all she wanted was to go back to bed and sleep.
All of a sudden, Orly turned to her mother and inquired, “Avi says our sister isn’t going to come home
again. Is that true, Mom?” Her voice reeked of suspicion and accusation.
“Of course that’s not true. Your sister and I had a quarrel, as you know, but we love each other,” Ella
said.
“Is it true that you gave Scott a call and asked him to dump Jeannette?” Avi asked with a grin,
apparently enjoying the subject immensely.
Ella glanced at her husband with widened eyes, but David raised his eyebrows and flipped his hands
open to indicate it wasn’t he who’d told them such a thing.
With practiced ease, Ella gave her voice the authoritarian tone she used when giving instructions to her
children. “That’s not quite right. I did speak with Scott, but I did not tell him to dump your sister. All I
said was not to rush into marriage.”
“I’m never going to get married,” Orly announced with certitude.
“Yeah, as if any guy would want to have you as his wife!” Avi snapped.
While she listened to her twins tease each other, for reasons she couldn’t understand Ella felt a nervous
smile settle on her mouth. She suppressed it. But the smile was there, carved under her skin, as she
walked them to the door and wished them all a nice day.
Only when she returned to her seat at the table could she get rid of the smile, and she did that simply by
allowing herself to sulk. The kitchen looked as if it had been attacked by an army of rats. Half-eaten
scrambled eggs, unfinished bowls of cereal, and dirty mugs cluttered the counter. Spirit was pacing the
floor, eager to go out for a walk, but even after two cups of coffee and a multivitamin drink all Ella could
manage was to take him out into the garden for a few minutes.
Back from the garden, Ella found the red light flashing on the answering machine. She pressed the button,
and to her great delight Jeannette’s melodious voice filled the room.
“Mom, are you there …? Well, I guess not, or you would have picked up the phone.” She chuckled.
“Okay, I was so angry at you I didn’t want to see your face again. But now I’m cool about it. I mean, what
you did was wrong, that’s for sure. You should never have called Scott. But I can understand why you did
it. Listen, you don’t need to protect me all the time. I’m not that premature baby who needed to be kept in
an incubator anymore. Stop being overprotective! Just let me be, okay?”
Ella’s eyes filled with tears. The sight of Jeannette as a newborn baby flashed across her mind. Her
skin utterly red and sad, her little fingers wrinkled and almost transparent, her lungs attached to a
breathing tube—she was so unprepared for this world. Ella had spent many a sleepless night listening to
her breathing just to make sure she was alive and would survive.
“Mom, one more thing,” added Jeannette, like an afterthought. “I love you.”
On that cue Ella let out a deep breath. Her mind shifted to Aziz’s e-mail. The wish tree had granted his
wish. At least the first part of it. By giving her a call, Jeannette had done her part. Now it fell upon Ella to
fulfill the rest. She called her daughter’s cell phone and found her on her way to the campus library.
“I got your message, honey. Listen, I’m so sorry. I want to apologize to you.”
There was a pause, brief but charged. “That’s all right, Mom.”
“No, it’s not. I should have shown more respect for your feelings.”
“Let’s leave it all behind, shall we?” said Jeannette, as though she were the mother and Ella her
rebellious daughter.
“Yes, dear.”
Now Jeannette dropped her voice to a confidential mumble, as if afraid of what she was going to ask
next. “What you said the other day kind of worried me. I mean, is that true? Are you really unhappy?”
“Of course not,” Ella answered, a bit too quickly. “I raised three beautiful children—how can I be
unhappy?”
But Jeannette didn’t sound convinced. “I meant with Daddy.”
Ella didn’t know what to say, except the truth. “Your father and I have been married a long time. It’s
difficult to remain in love after so many years.”
“I understand,” said Jeannette, and, oddly, Ella had the feeling she did.
After she hung up, Ella allowed herself to muse over love. She sat curled up in her rocking chair and
wondered how she, hurt and cynical as she was, could ever experience love again. Love was for those
looking for some rhyme or reason in this wildly spinning world. But what about those who had long given
up the quest?
Before the day ended, she wrote back to Aziz.
Dear Aziz (if I may),
Thanks for your kind and heartwarming reply, which helped me through a family crisis. My daughter and I managed to leave behind that
awful misunderstanding, as you politely called it.
You were right about one thing. I constantly vacillate between two opposites: aggressive and passive. Either I meddle too much in
the lives of loved ones or I feel helpless in the face of their actions.
As for submission, I’ve never experienced the kind of peacefulsurrender you wrote to me about. Honestly, I don’t think I have what
it takes to be a Sufi. But I have to give you this: Amazingly, things between Jeannette and me turned out the way I wanted only after I
stopped wanting and interfering. I owe you a big thank-you. I, too, would have prayed for you, but it has been such a long time since I
last knocked on God’s door that I’m not sure if He still lives in the same place. Oops, did I speak like the innkeeper in your story? Don’t
worry, I’m not that bitter. Not yet. Not yet.
Your friend in Northampton,
Ella
The Letter
FROM BAGHDAD TO KAYSERI, SEPTEMBER 29, 1243
Bismillahirrahmanirrahim,
Brother Seyyid Burhaneddin,
Peace be on you, and the mercy of God, and His blessings.
I was very pleased to receive your letter and learn that you were as devoted to the path of love as ever. And yet your letter also put
me in a quandary. For as soon as I learned you were looking for the companion of Rumi, I knew who you were talking about. What I
did not know was what to do next.
You see, there was under my roof a wandering dervish, Shams of Tabriz, who fit your description to the letter. Shams believed he
had a special mission in this world, and to this end he wished to enlighten an enlightened person. Looking for neither disciples nor
students, he asked God for a companion. Once he said to me that he hadn’t come for the common people. He had come to put his
finger on the pulse of those who guided the world to the Truth.
When I received your letter, I knew that Shams was destined to meet Rumi. Still, to make sure every one of my dervishes got an
equal chance, I gathered them and without going into any details told them about a scholar whose heart had to be opened. Though there
were a few candidates, Shams was the only one who persevered even after hearing about the dangers of the task. That was back in
winter. The same scene was repeated in spring and then in autumn.
You might be wondering why I waited this long. I have thought hard about this and frankly can offer only one reason: I have grown
fond of Shams. It pained me to know that I was sending him on a dangerous journey.
You see, Shams is not an easy person. As long as he lived a nomadic life, he could manage it pretty well, but if he stays in a town
and mingles with the townspeople, I am afraid he will ruffle some feathers. This is why I tried to postpone his journey as long as I could.
The evening before Shams left, we took a long walk around the mulberry trees where I grow silkworms. Old habits rarely die.
Painfully delicate and surprisingly strong, silk resembles love. I told Shams how the silkworms destroy the silk they produce as they
emerge from their cocoons. This is why the farmers have to make a choice between the silk and the silkworm. More often than not,
they kill the silkworm while it is inside the cocoon in order to pull the silk out intact. It takes the lives of hundreds of silkworms to
produce one silk scarf.
The evening was now coming to an end. A chilly wind blew in our direction, and I shivered. In my old age, I get cold easily, but I
knew it wasn’t my age that caused this shiver. It was because I realized this was the last time Shams would stand in my garden. We
will not see each other again. Not in this world. He, too, must have sensed it, for there was now sorrow in his eyes.
This morning at the crack of dawn, he came to kiss my hand and ask for my blessings. I was surprised to see he had cut his long
dark hair and shaved his beard, but he didn’t offer an explanation and I didn’t ask. Before he left, he said his part in this story resembled
the silkworm. He and Rumi would retreat into a cocoon of Divine Love, only to come out when the time was ripe and the precious silk
woven. But eventually, for the silk to survive, the silkworm had to die.
Thus he left for Konya. May God protect him. I know I have done the right thing, and so have you, but my heart is heavy with
sadness, and I already miss the most unusual and unruly dervish my lodge has ever welcomed.
In the end we all belong to God, and to Him we shall return.
May God suffice you,
Baba Zaman
The Novice
BAGHDAD, SEPTEMBER 29, 1243
Being a dervish is not easy. Everybody warned me so. What they forgot to mention was that I had to go
through hell in order to become one. Ever since I came here, I have been working like a dog. Most days I
work so hard that when I finally lie on my sleeping mat, I can’t sleep because of the pain in my muscles
and the throbbing in my feet. I wonder if anybody notices how awfully I am being treated. Even if they do,
they surely show no signs of empathy. And the harder I strive, the worse it seems to get. They don’t even
know my name. “The new novice,” they call me, and behind my back they whisper, “that ginger-haired
ignoramus.”
The worst by far is to work in the kitchen under the supervision of the cook. The man has a stone
instead of a heart. He could have been a bloodthirsty commander in the Mongol army rather than a cook in
a dervish lodge. I can’t recall ever hearing him say anything nice to anyone. I don’t think he even knows
how to smile.
Once I asked a senior dervish if all the novices had to go through the trial of working with the cook in
the kitchen. He smiled mysteriously and replied, “Not all novices, only some.”
Then why me? Why does the master want me to suffer more than the other novices? Is it because my
nafs is bigger than theirs and needs harsher treatment to be disciplined?
Every day I am the first to wake up, to get water from the nearby creek. I then heat up the stove and
bake the flat sesame bread. Preparing the soup to be served at breakfast is also my responsibility. It is not
easy to feed fifty people. Everything needs to be cooked in cauldrons that are no smaller than bathtubs.
And guess who scrubs and washes them afterward? From dawn to dusk, I mop the floors, clean the
surfaces, wipe the stairs, sweep the courtyard, chop wood, and spend hours on my hands and knees to
scrub the creaky old floorboards. I prepare marmalades and spicy relishes. I pickle carrots and squash,
making sure there is just the right amount of salt, enough to float an egg. If I add too much or too little salt,
the cook throws a fit and breaks all the jars, and I have to make everything anew.
To top it all off, I am expected to recite prayers in Arabic as I perform each and every task. The cook
wants me to pray aloud so that he can check whether I skip or mispronounce a word. So I pray and work,
work and pray. “The better you bear the hardships in the kitchen, the faster you will mature, son,” my
tormentor claims. “While you learn to cook, your soul will simmer.”
“But how long is this trial going to last?” I asked him once.
“A thousand and one days” was his answer. “If Scheherazade the storyteller managed to come up with
a new tale every night for that long, you, too, can endure.”
This is crazy! Do I resemble in the least bit that loudmouthed Scheherazade? Besides, all she did was
lie on velvet cushions twiddling her toes and make up fancy stories while she fed the cruel prince sweet
grapes and figments of her imagination. I don’t see any hard work there. She wouldn’t have survived a
week if she were asked to accomplish half of my work. I don’t know if anyone is counting. But I surely
am. And I have 624 more days to go.
The first forty days of my trial I spent in a cell so small and low that I could neither lie down nor stand
up and had to sit on my knees all the time. If I longed for proper food or some comfort, was scared of the
dark or the loneliness, or God forbid had wet dreams about a woman’s body, I was ordered to ring the
silver bells dangling from the ceiling for spiritual help. I never did. This is not to say I never had any
distracting thoughts. But what’s wrong with having a few distractions when you can’t even move?
When the seclusion period was over, I was sent back to the kitchen to suffer at the hands of the cook.
And suffer I did. But the truth is, as bitter as I might be toward him, I never broke the cook’s rules—that
is, until the evening Shams of Tabriz arrived. That night, when the cook finally caught up with me, he gave
me the worst beating of my life, breaking willow stick after willow stick on my back. Then he put my
shoes in front of the door, with their fronts pointing out, to make it clear it was time for me to leave. In a
dervish lodge, they never kick you out or tell you openly that you have failed; instead they make you
silently leave.
“We cannot make you a dervish against your will,” the cook announced. “A man can bring a donkey to
the water but cannot make him drink. The donkey should have it in him. There’s no other way.”
That makes me the donkey, of course. Frankly, I would have left this place a long time ago had it not
been for Shams of Tabriz. My curiosity about him kept me anchored here. I had never met anyone like him
before. He feared no one and obeyed no one. Even the cook respected him. If there ever were a role
model for me in this lodge, it was Shams with his charm, dignity, and unruliness. Not the humble old
master.
Yes, Shams of Tabriz was my hero. After seeing him, I decided I didn’t need to turn myself into a meek
dervish. If I spent enough time next to him, I could become just as brash, steadfast, and rebellious. So
when autumn came and I realized that Shams was leaving for good, I decided to leave with him.
Having made up my mind, I went to see Baba Zaman and found him sitting, reading an old book by the
light of an oil lamp.
“What do you want, novice?” he asked wearily, as if seeing me tired him.
As forthright as I could be, I said, “I understand that Shams of Tabriz is leaving soon, Master. I want to
go with him. He might need company on the way.”
“I didn’t know you cared for him so much,” the master said suspiciously. “Or is it because you are
looking for ways to avoid your tasks in the kitchen? Your trial is not over yet. You can hardly be called a
dervish.”
“Perhaps going on a journey with someone like Shams is my trial,” I suggested, knowing that it was a
bold thing to say but saying it anyhow.
The master lowered his gaze, lapsing into contemplation. The longer his silence, the more I was
convinced he would scold me for my insolence and call the cook to keep a better eye on me. But he did no
such thing. Instead he looked at me forlornly and shook his head.
“Perhaps you were not created for life in a lodge, my son. After all, out of every seven novices that set
out on this path, only one remains. My feeling is you are not fit to be a dervish and need to look for your
kismet elsewhere. As for accompanying Shams on his journey, you will have to ask him about that.”
Thus giving me notice, Baba Zaman closed the subject with a polite but dogged gesture of his head and
went back to his book.
I felt sad and small, but strangely liberated.
Shams
BAGHDAD, SEPTEMBER 30, 1243
Battling the winds, my horse and I sped away at the crack of dawn. Only once did I stop to look back. The
dervish lodge resembled a bird’s nest hidden among mulberry trees and shrubs. For a while Baba
Zaman’s weary face kept flickering across my mind. I knew he was concerned about me. But I saw no real
reason for that. I had embarked on an inner journey of Love. How could any harm come out of that? It was
my tenth rule: East, west, south, or north makes little difference. No matter what your destination, just
be sure to make every journey a journey within. If you travel within, you’ll travel the whole wide world
and beyond.
Though I anticipated hardships ahead, that didn’t worry me much. Whatever fate awaited me in Konya,
I welcomed it. As a Sufi, I had been trained to accept the thorn with the rose, the difficulties with the
beauties of life. Hence followed another rule: The midwife knows that when there is no pain, the way for
the baby cannot be opened and the mother cannot give birth. Likewise, for a new Self to be born,
hardship is necessary.
Just as clay needs to go through intense heat to become strong, Love can only be perfected in pain.
The night before I left the dervish lodge, I opened all the windows in my room to let the sounds and the
smells of the darkness waft in. By the flickering light of a candle, I cut my long hair. Thick clusters of it
fell to the floor. I then shaved my beard and mustache and got rid of my eyebrows. When done, I inspected
the face in the mirror, now brighter and younger. Without any hair my face was cleared of a name, age, or
gender. It had no past or future, sealed forever in this moment.
“Your journey is already changing you,” said the master when I went to his room to say good-bye.
“And it hasn’t even started yet.”
“Yes, I realized,” I said softly. “It is another one of the forty rules: The quest for Love changes us.
There is no seeker among those who search for Love who has not matured on the way. The moment you
start looking for Love, you start to change within and without.”
With a slight smile, Baba Zaman took out a velvet box and handed it to me. Inside, I found three things:
a silver mirror, a silk handkerchief, and a glass flask of ointment.
“These items will help you on your journey. Use them when need be. If you ever lose self-esteem, the
mirror will show your inner beauty. In case your reputation is stained, the handkerchief will remind you
of how pure your heart is. As for the balm, it will heal your wounds, both inside and outside.”
I caressed each object, closed the box, and thanked Baba Zaman. Then there was nothing else to say.
As the birds chirped and tiny dewdrops hung from the branches with the first light of the morning, I
mounted my horse. I set off toward Konya, not knowing what to expect but trusting the destiny that the
Almighty had prepared for me.
The Novice
BAGHDAD, SEPTEMBER 30, 1243
Behind Shams of Tabriz, I rode my stolen horse. Hard as I tried to keep a safe distance between us, it
soon proved impossible to trail him without making myself apparent. When Shams stopped at a bazaar in
Baghdad to refresh himself and buy a few things for the road, I decided to make myself known and threw
myself in front of his horse.
“Ginger-haired ignoramus, what are you doing there lying on the ground?” Shams exclaimed from his
horse, looking half amused, half surprised.
I knelt, clasped my hands, and craned my neck, as I had seen beggars do, and implored, “I want to come
with you. Please let me join you.”
“Do you have any idea where I am going?”
I paused. That question had never occurred to me. “No, but it makes no difference. I want to become
your disciple. You are my role model.”
“I always travel alone and want no disciples or students, thank you! And I am certainly no role model
for anyone, much less for you,” Shams said. “So just go on your way. But if you are still going to look for
a master in the future, please keep in mind a golden rule: There are more fake gurus and false teachers
in this world than the number of stars in the visible universe. Don’t confuse power-driven, selfcentered
people with true mentors. A genuine spiritual master will not direct your attention to himself
or herself and will not expect absolute obedience or utter admiration from you, but instead will help
you to appreciate and admire your inner self. True mentors are as transparent as glass. They let the
Light of God pass through them.”
“Please give me a chance,” I implored. “All the famous travelers had someone to assist them on the
road, like an apprentice or something.”
Shams scratched his chin pensively, as if acknowledging the truth in my words. “Do you have the
strength to bear my company?” he inquired.
I jumped to my feet, nodding with all my heart: “I certainly do. And my strength comes from within.”
“Very well, then. Here is your first task: I want you to go to the nearest tavern and get yourself a pitcher
of wine. You will drink it here in the bazaar.”
Now, I was used to scrubbing the floors with my robes, polishing pots and pans till they sparkled like
the fine Venetian glass I had seen in the hands of an artisan who had escaped from Constantinople long
ago when the Crusaders had sacked the city. I could chop a hundred onions in one sitting or peel and
mince cloves of garlic, all in the name of spiritual development. But drinking wine in the midst of a
crowded bazaar to that end was beyond my ken. I looked at him in horror.
“I cannot do that. If my father learns, he’ll break my legs. He sent me to the dervish lodge so that I
could become a better Muslim, not a heathen. What will my family and friends think of me?”
I felt the burning glare of Shams on me and shivered under the pressure, just like the day I had spied on
him behind closed doors.
“You see, you cannot be my disciple,” he pronounced with conviction. “You are too timid for me. You
care too much about what other people think. But you know what? Because you are so desperate to win
the approval of others, you’ll never get rid of their criticisms, no matter how hard you try.”
I realized that my chance to accompany him was slipping away and rushed in to defend myself. “How
was I to know you were not asking that question on purpose? Wine is strictly forbidden by Islam. I thought
you were testing me.”
“But that would be playing God. It is not up to us to judge and measure each other’s devoutness,”
Shams answered.
I looked around in despair, not knowing what to make of his words, my mind pounded like dumpling
dough.
Shams went on: “You say you want to travel the path, but you don’t want to sacrifice anything to that
end. Money, fame, power, lavishness, or carnal pleasure—whatever it is that one holds most dear in life,
one should dispose of that first.”
Patting his horse, Shams concluded with an air of finality, “I think you ought to stay in Baghdad with
your family. Find an honest tradesman and become his apprentice. I have a feeling you might make a good
merchant someday. But don’t be a greedy one! Now, with your permission, I need to get going.”
With that, he saluted me one last time, kicked his horse, and galloped away, the world sliding under its
thundering hoofs. I hopped onto my horse and chased him toward the outskirts of Baghdad, but the
distance between us got greater and greater until he was no more than a dark spot in the distance. Even
long after that spot had disappeared on the horizon, I could feel the weight of Shams’s stare on me.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, MAY 24, 2008
Breakfast is the most important meal of the day. Being a big believer of this saying, every morning,
weekdays and weekends alike, Ella made her way to the kitchen. A good breakfast, she thought, set the
tone for the rest of the day. She had read in women’s magazines that families who regularly had a proper
breakfast together were more cohesive and harmonious than those in which each member rushed out the
door half hungry. And though she firmly believed in this research, she had yet to experience the joyful
breakfast the magazines wrote about. Her breakfast experience was a collision of galaxies where every
member of her family marched to a different drummer. Everyone wanted to eat a different thing at
breakfast, which was entirely against Ella’s notion of eating together. How could there be unity at a table
when one nibbled toasted bread and jam (Jeannette) while another chomped honey-puffed cereal (Avi)
and a third waited patiently to be served scrambled eggs (David) and a fourth refused to eat anything at
all (Orly)? All the same, breakfast was important. Every morning she prepared it, determined that no
child of hers would begin the day munching on candy or some other junk food.
But this morning when she entered the kitchen, instead of brewing coffee, squeezing oranges, or toasting
bread, the first thing Ella did was to sit at the kitchen table and turn on her laptop. She logged on to the
Internet to see whether there was an e-mail from Aziz. To her delight, there was.
Dear Ella,
I was so happy to learn that things have improved between you and your daughter. As for me, I left the village of Momostenango
yesterday at the crack of dawn. Strange, I stayed here only a few days, and yet when the time came to bid farewell, I felt sad, almost
grieved. Would I ever see this tiny village in Guatemala again? I didn’t think so.
Each time I say good-bye to a place I like, I feel like I am leaving a part of me behind. I guess whether we choose to travel as much
as Marco Polo did or stay in the same spot from cradle to grave, life is a sequence of births and deaths. Moments are born and
moments die. For new experiences to come to light, old ones need to wither away. Don’t you think?
While in Momostenango, I meditated and tried to visualize your aura. Before long, three colors came to me: warm yellow, timid
orange, and reserved metallic purple. I had a feeling these were your colors. I thought they were beautiful both separately and together.
My final stop in Guatemala is Chajul—a small town with adobe houses and children with eyes wise beyond their years. In each
house, women of all ages weave magnificent tapestries. I asked a granny to choose a tapestry and said it was for a lady living in
Northampton. After giving it some thought, she pulled a tapestry from a huge pile behind her. I swear to God, there were more than
fifty tapestries of every possible color in that pile. Yet the one she chose for you was composed of only three tones: yellow, orange, and
purple. I thought you might like to know about this coincidence, if there is such a thing in God’s universe.
Does it ever occur to you that our exchange might not be a result of coincidence?
Warm regards,
Aziz
P.S. If you want, I can send you your tapestry via mail, or I can wait till the day we meet for coffee and bring it myself.
Ella closed her eyes and tried to imagine how the colors of her aura surrounded her face. Interestingly, the
image of herself that popped up in her mind was not her grown-up self but her as a child, around seven
years of age.
Many things came flooding back to her, memories that she thought she had long left behind. The sight of
her mother standing still with a pistachio green apron around her waist and a measuring cup in her hand,
her face an ashen mask of pain; dangling paper hearts on the walls, bright and sparkly; and the body of her
father hanging from the ceiling as if he wanted to blend with the Christmas decorations and give the house
a festive look. She remembered how she had spent her teenage years holding her mother responsible for
the suicide of her father. As a young girl, Ella had promised herself that when she got married, she would
always make her husband happy and not fail in her marriage, like her mother. In her endeavor to make her
marriage as different from her mother’s as possible, she had not married a Christian man, preferring to
marry inside her faith.
It was only a few years earlier that Ella had stopped hating her aging mother, and though the two of
them had been on good terms lately, the truth was, deep inside she still felt ill at ease when she
remembered the past.
“Mom! … Earth to Mom! Earth to Mom!”
Ella heard a ripple of giggles and whispers behind her shoulder. When she turned around, she saw four
pairs of eyes watching her with amusement. Orly, Avi, Jeannette, and David had for once all come to
breakfast at the same time and were now standing side by side inspecting her as if she were an exotic
creature. From the way they looked, it seemed they had been standing there for a while, trying to get her
attention.
“Good morning, you all.” Ella smiled.
“How come you didn’t hear us?” Orly asked, sounding genuinely surprised.
“You seemed so absorbed in that screen,” David said without looking at her.
Ella’s gaze followed her husband’s, and there on the open screen in front of her, she saw Aziz Z.
Zahara’s e-mail shining dimly. In a flash she closed her laptop, without waiting for it to shut down.
“I’ve got a lot of reading to do for the literary agency,” Ella said, rolling her eyes. “I was working on
my report.”
“No you were not! You were reading your e-mails,” Avi said, his face serious, matter-of-fact.
What was it in teenage boys that made them so eager to detect everyone’s flaws and lies? Ella
wondered. But, to her relief, the others didn’t seem interested in the subject. In fact, they were all looking
somewhere else now, focused on the kitchen counter.
It was Orly who turned to Ella, voicing the question for them all. “Mom, how come you haven’t made
us any breakfast this morning?”
Now Ella turned to the counter and saw what they had seen. There was no coffee brewing, no
scrambled eggs on the stove, no toast with blueberry sauce. She nodded repeatedly as if agreeing with an
inner voice that spoke an undeniable truth.
Right, she thought, how come she had forgotten the breakfast?
PART TWO
Water
THE THINGS THAT ARE FLUID, CHANGING, AND UNPREDICTABLE
Rumi
KONYA, OCTOBER 15, 1244
Bright and plump, the gorgeous full moon resembled a massive pearl hanging in the sky. I got up from the
bed and looked out the window into the courtyard, awash in moonlight. Even seeing such beauty,
however, did not soothe the pounding of my heart or the trembling of my hands.
“Effendi, you look pale. Did you have the same dream again?” whispered my wife. “Shall I bring you a
glass of water?”
I told her not to worry and to go back to sleep. There was nothing she could do. Our dreams were part
of our destiny, and they would run their course as God willed it. Besides, there must be a reason, I
thought, that every night for the last forty days I had been having the same dream.
The beginning of the dream differed slightly each time. Or perhaps it was always the same but I entered
it from a different gate each evening. On this occasion I saw myself reading the Qur’an in a carpeted room
that felt familiar but was like no place I had been before. Right across from me sat a dervish, tall, thin,
and erect, with a veil on his face. He was holding a candelabrum with five glowing candles providing me
with light so that I could read.
After a while I lifted my head to show the dervish the verse I was reading, and only then did I realize,
to my awe, that what I thought was a candelabrum was in fact the man’s right hand. He had been holding
out his hand to me, with each one of his fingers aflame.
In panic I looked around for water, but there was none in sight. I took off my cloak and threw it on the
dervish to extinguish the flames. But when I lifted the cloak, he had vanished, leaving only a burning
candle behind.
From this point onward, it was always the same dream. I started to look for him in the house, searching
every nook and cranny. Next I ran into the courtyard, where the roses had blossomed in a sea of bright
yellow. I called out left and right, but the man was nowhere to be seen.
“Come back, beloved. Where are you?”
Finally, as if led by an ominous intuition, I approached the well and peered down at the dark waters
churning below. At first I couldn’t see anything, but in a little while the moon showered me in its glittering
light and the courtyard acquired a rare luminosity. Only then did I notice a pair of black eyes staring up at
me with unprecedented sorrow from the bottom of the well.
“They killed him!” somebody shouted. Perhaps it was me. Perhaps this was what my own voice would
sound like in a state of infinite agony.
And I screamed and screamed until my wife held me tight, drew me to her bosom, and asked softly,
“Effendi, did you have the same dream again?”
After Kerra went back to sleep, I slipped into the courtyard. In that moment I had the impression that the
dream was still with me, vivid and frightening. In the stillness of the night, the sight of the well sent a
shiver down my spine, but I couldn’t help sitting next to it, listening to the night breeze rustle gently
through the trees.
At times like these, I feel a sudden wave of sadness take hold of me, though I can never tell why. My
life is complete and fulfilled, in that I have been blessed with the three things I hold most dear:
knowledge, virtue, and the capability to help others find God.
At age thirty-eight, I have been given by God more than I could ever have asked for. I have been trained
as a preacher and a jurist and initiated into The Science of Divine Intuition—the knowledge given to
prophets, saints, and scholars in varying degrees. Guided by my late father, educated by the best teachers
of our time, I have worked hard to deepen my awareness with the belief that this was the duty God had
assigned me.
My old master Seyyid Burhaneddin used to say I was one of God’s beloved, since I was given the
honorable task of delivering His message to His people and helping them differentiate right from wrong.
For many years I have been teaching at the madrassa, discussing theology with other sharia scholars,
instructing my disciples, studying law and hadiths, giving sermons every Friday at the biggest mosque in
town. I have long lost track of the number of students I have tutored. It is flattering to hear people praise
my preaching skills and tell me how my words changed their lives at a time when they most needed
guidance.
I am blessed with a loving family, good friends, and loyal disciples. Never in my life have I suffered
destitution or scarcity, although the loss of my first wife was devastating. I thought I would never get
married again, but I did, and thanks to Kerra I have experienced love and joy. Both of my sons are grown,
although it never ceases to amaze me to see how different from each other they turned out to be. They are
like two seeds that, though planted side by side in the same soil and nourished with the same sun and
water, have blossomed into completely different plants. I am proud of them, just as I am proud of our
adopted daughter, who has unique talents. I am a happy, satisfied man both in my private life and in the
community.
Why, then, do I feel this void inside me, growing deeper and wider with each passing day? It gnaws at
my soul like a disease and accompanies me wherever I go, as quiet as a mouse and just as ravenous.
Shams
KONYA, OCTOBER 17, 1244
Before passing through the gates of a town I’ve never visited, I take a minute to salute its saints—the dead
and the living, the known and the hidden. Never in my life have I arrived at a new place without getting
the blessing of its saints first. It makes no difference to me whether that place belongs to Muslims,
Christians, or Jews. I believe that the saints are beyond such trivial nominal distinctions. A saint belongs
to all humanity.
So when I saw Konya for the first time from a distance, I did what I always did. But something unusual
happened next. Instead of greeting me back and offering their blessings, as they always did, the saints
remained as silent as broken tombstones. I saluted them again, more loudly and assertively this time, in
case they had not heard me. But once again there followed silence. I realized that the saints had heard me,
all right. They just weren’t giving me their blessing.
“Tell me what’s wrong?” I asked the wind so that it would carry my words to the saints far and wide.
In a little while, the wind returned with an answer. “O dervish, in this city you’ll find only two
extremes, and nothing in between. Either pure love or pure hatred. We are warning you. Enter at your own
risk.”
“In that case there is no need to worry,” I said. “As long as I can encounter pure love, that’ll be enough
for me.”
Upon hearing that, the saints of Konya gave me their blessing. But I didn’t want to enter the city just yet.
I sat down under an oak tree, and as my horse munched on the sparse grass around, I looked at the city
looming in the distance. The minarets of Konya glistened in the sun like shards of glass. Every now and
then, I heard dogs barking, donkeys braying, children laughing, and vendors yelling at the top of their
lungs—ordinary sounds of a city throbbing with life. What kinds of joys and sorrows, I wondered, were
being lived at this moment behind closed doors and latticed windows? Being used to an itinerant life, I
found it slightly unnerving to have to settle in a city, but I recalled another fundamental rule: Try not to
resist the changes that come your way. Instead let life live through you. And do not worry that your life
is turning upside down. How do you know that the side you are used to is better than the one to come?
A friendly voice yanked me out of my reverie. “Selamun aleykum, dervish!”
When I turned around, I saw an olive-skinned, brawny peasant with a drooping mustache. He was
riding a cart pulled by an ox so skinny that the poor thing looked as if it could at any moment breathe its
last.
“Aleykum selam, may God bless you!” I called out.
“Why are you sitting here on your own? If you are tired of riding that horse of yours, I could give you a
lift.”
I smiled. “Thanks, but I think I could go faster on foot than with your ox.”
“Don’t sell my ox short,” the peasant said, sounding offended. “He might be old and frail, but he’s still
my best friend.”
Put in my place by these words, I jumped to my feet and bowed before the peasant. How could I, a
minor element in God’s vast circle of creation, belittle another element in the circle, be it an animal or a
human being?
“I apologize to you and your ox,” I said. “Please forgive me.”
A shadow of disbelief crossed the peasant’s face. He stood deadpan for a moment, weighing whether I
was mocking him or not. “Nobody ever does that,” he said when he spoke again, flashing me a warm
smile.
“You mean apologize to your ox?”
“Well, that, too. But I was thinking nobody ever apologizes to me. It’s usually the other way round. I am
the one who says sorry all the time. Even when people do me wrong, I apologize to them.”
I was touched to hear that. “The Qur’an tells us each and every one of us was made in the best of
molds. It’s one of the rules,” I said softly.
“What rule?” he asked.
“God is busy with the completion of your work, both outwardly and inwardly. He is fully occupied
with you. Every human being is a work in progress that is slowly but inexorably moving toward
perfection. We are each an unfinished work of art both waiting and striving to be completed. God
deals with each of us separately because humanity is a fine art of skilled penmanship where every
single dot is equally important for the entire picture.”
“Are you here for the sermon, too?” the peasant asked with a renewed interest. “It looks like it’s going
to be very crowded. He is a remarkable man.”
My heart skipped a beat as I realized whom he was talking about. “Tell me, what is so special about
Rumi’s sermons?”
The peasant fell quiet and squinted into the vast horizon for a while. His mind seemed to be
everywhere and nowhere.
Then he said, “I come from a village that has had its share of hardships. First the famine, then the
Mongols. They burned and plundered every village in their way. But what they did in the big cities was
even worse. They captured Erzurum, Sivas, and Kayseri and massacred the entire male population, taking
the women with them. I myself have not lost a loved one or my house. But I did lose something. I lost my
joy.”
“What’s that got to do with Rumi?” I asked.
Dropping his gaze back to his ox, the peasant murmured tonelessly, “Everyone says if you listen to
Rumi preach, your sadness will be cured.”
Personally, I didn’t think there was anything wrong with sadness. Just the opposite—hypocrisy made
people happy, and truth made them sad. But I didn’t tell this to the peasant. Instead I said, “Why don’t I
join you until Konya, and you’ll tell me more about Rumi?”
I tied my horse’s reins to the cart and climbed in to sit beside the peasant, glad to see that the ox didn’t
mind the additional load. One way or the other, it walked the same excruciatingly slow walk. The peasant
offered me bread and goat cheese. We ate as we talked. In this state, while the sun blazed in an indigo
sky, and under the watchful eyes of the town’s saints, I entered Konya.
“Take good care, my friend,” I said as I jumped off the cart and loosened the reins of my horse.
“Make sure you come to the sermon!” the peasant yelled expectantly.
I nodded as I waved good-bye. “Inshallah.”
Although I was eager to listen to the sermon and dying to meet Rumi, I wanted to spend some time in
the city first and learn what the townspeople thought about the great preacher. I wanted to see him through
foreign eyes, kind and unkind, loving and unloving, before I looked on him with my own.
Hasan the Beggar
KONYA, OCTOBER 17, 1244
Believe it or not, they call this purgatory on earth “holy suffering.” I am a leper stuck in limbo. Neither the
dead nor the living want me among them. Mothers point me out on the streets to scare their misbehaving
toddlers, and children throw stones at me. Artisans chase me from their storefronts to ward off the bad
luck that follows me everywhere, and pregnant women turn their faces away whenever they set eyes on
me, fearing that their babies will be born defective. None of these people seem to realize that as keen as
they are to avoid me, I am far keener to avoid them and their pitiful stares.
It is the skin that changes first, becoming thicker and darker. Patches of varying sizes, the color of rotten
eggs, appear on the shoulders, knees, arms, and face. There is a lot of stinging and burning in this phase,
but then somehow the pain withers away, or else one becomes numb to it. Next the patches start to enlarge
and swell up, turning into ugly bulbs. The hands turn to claws, and the face is so deformed as to be
unrecognizable. Now that I am nearing the final stages, I cannot close my eyelids anymore. Tears and
saliva flow without my control. Six of the nails on my hands have fallen off, and one is on its way. Oddly
enough, I still have my hair. I guess I should consider that lucky.
I heard that in Europe lepers are kept outside the city walls. Here they let us live in the city as long as
we carry a bell to warn other people of our presence. We are also allowed to beg, which is a good thing,
because otherwise we would probably starve. Begging is one of only two ways to survive. The other is
praying. Not because God pays special attention to lepers but because for some strange reason people
think He does. Hence, as much as they despise us, the townspeople also respect us. They hire us to pray
for the sick, the crippled, and the elderly. They pay and feed us well, hoping to squeeze out of our mouths
a few extra prayers. On the streets, lepers might be treated worse than dogs, but in places where death and
despair loom large, we are the sultans.
Whenever I am hired to pray, I bow my head and make incomprehensible sounds in Arabic, pretending
to be absorbed in prayer. Pretend is all I can do, for I don’t think God hears me. I have no reason to
believe He does.
Though it is less profitable, I find begging much easier than praying. At least I am not deceiving anyone.
Friday is the best day of the week to beg, except when it is Ramadan, in which case the whole month is
quite lucrative. The last day of Ramadan is by far the best time to make money. That is when even the
hopeless penny-pinchers race to give alms, keen to compensate for all their sins, past and present. Once a
year, people don’t turn away from beggars. To the contrary, they specifically look for one, the more
miserable the better. So profound is their need to show off how generous and charitable they are, not only
do they race to give us alms, but for that single day they almost love us.
Today could be a very profitable day, too, since Rumi is giving one of his Friday sermons. The mosque
is already packed. Those who can’t find a seat inside are lining up in the courtyard. The afternoon is the
perfect occasion for panhandlers and pickpockets. And just like me, they are all present here, scattered
within the crowd.
I sat down right across from the entrance of the mosque with my back to a maple tree. There was a dank
smell of rain in the air, mixed with the sweet, faint tang coming from the orchards far away. I put my
mendicant bowl in front of me. Unlike many others in this business, I never have to openly ask for alms. A
leper doesn’t need to whine and implore, making up stories about how wretched his life is or how poor
his health. Giving people a glimpse of my face has the effect of a thousand words. So I simply uncovered
my face and sat back.
In the next hour, a few coins were dropped into my bowl. All were chipped copper. I yearned for a
gold coin, with symbols of sun, lion, and crescent. Since the late Aladdin Keykubad had loosened the
rules on currency, coins issued by the beys of Aleppo, the Fatimid rulers in Cairo, and the caliph of
Baghdad, not to mention the Italian florin, were all pronounced valid. The rulers of Konya accepted them
all, and so did the town’s beggars.
Together with the coins, a few dry leaves fell on my lap. The maple tree was shedding its reddish gold
leaves, and as a gusty wind blew, quite a number of these made it into my bowl, as if the tree were giving
me alms. Suddenly I realized that the maple tree and I had something in common. A tree shedding its
leaves in autumn resembled a man shedding his limbs in the final stages of leprosy.
I was a naked tree. My skin, my organs, my face falling apart. Every day another part of my body
abandoned me. And for me, unlike the maple tree, there would be no spring in which I would blossom.
What I lost, I lost forever. When people looked at me, they didn’t see who I was but what I was missing.
Whenever they placed a coin in my bowl, they did so with amazing speed and avoided any eye contact, as
if my gaze were contagious. In their eyes I was worse than a thief or a murderer. As much as they
disapproved of such outlaws, they didn’t treat them as if they were invisible. When it came to me,
however, all they saw was death staring them in the face. That’s what scared them—to recognize that
death could be this close and this ugly.
Suddenly there was a great commotion in the background. I heard somebody yell, “He is coming! He is
coming!”
Sure enough, there was Rumi, riding a horse as white as milk, wearing an exquisite amber caftan
embroidered with golden leaves and baby pearls, erect and proud, wise and noble, followed by a throng
of admirers. Radiating an air of charisma and confidence, he looked less like a scholar than a ruler—the
sultan of the wind, the fire, the water, and the earth. Even his horse stood tall and firm, as if aware of the
distinction of the man he carried.
I pocketed the coins in my bowl, wrapped my head so as to leave half of my face in the open, and
entered the mosque. Inside, it was so packed it seemed impossible to breathe, let alone find a seat. But the
one good thing about being a leper was that no matter how crowded a place, I could always find a seat,
since nobody wanted to sit next to me.
“Brothers,” Rumi said, his voice rising high, sweeping low. “The vastness of the universe makes us
feel small, even inconsequential. Some of you might be asking, ‘What meaning could I, in my limitedness,
possibly have for God?’ This, I believe, is a question that has occurred to many from time to time. In
today’s sermon I want to generate some specific answers to that.”
Rumi’s two sons were in the front row—the handsome one, Sultan Walad, who everyone said
resembled his late mother, and the young one, Aladdin, with an animated face but curiously furtive eyes. I
could see that both were proud of their father.
“The children of Adam were honored with knowledge so great that neither the mountains nor the
heavens could shoulder it,” Rumi continued. “That is why it says in the Qur’an, Truly We offered the
trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains, but they refused to bear it because they were
afraid of it. Only man took it up. Having been given such an honorable position, human beings should not
aim any lower than what God had intended.”
Pronouncing his vowels in that strange way only the educated are capable of, Rumi talked about God,
assuring us that He dwelled not on a distant throne in the sky but very close to each and every one of us.
What brought us even closer to God, he said, was none other than suffering.
“Your hand opens and closes all the time. If it did not, you would be paralyzed. Your deepest presence
is in every small contracting and expanding. The two are as beautifully balanced and coordinated as the
wings of a bird.”
At first I liked what he said. It warmed my heart to think of joy and sorrow as dependent on each other
as a bird’s wings. But almost instantly I felt a wave of resentment rise up in my throat. What did Rumi
know about suffering? As the son of an eminent man and heir to a wealthy, prominent family, life had
always been good to him. I knew he had lost his first wife, but I didn’t believe he had ever experienced
real misfortune. Born with a silver spoon in his mouth, raised in distinguished circles, tutored by the best
scholars, and always loved, pampered, and admired—how dare he preach on suffering?
With a sinking heart, I realized that the contrast between Rumi and me couldn’t be greater. Why was
God so unfair? To me He had given poverty, sickness, and misery. To Rumi riches, success, and wisdom.
With his flawless reputation and royal demeanor, he hardly belonged to this world, at least not to this city.
I had to cover my face if I didn’t want people to be revolted by the sight of me, while he shone in public
like a precious gem. I wondered how he would fare if he were in my shoes? Had it ever occurred to him
that even someone as perfect and privileged as he could someday tumble and fall? Had he ever
contemplated how it would feel to be an outcast, even for one day? Would he still be the great Rumi if he
had been given the life I was given?
With each new question, my resentment rose, sweeping away whatever admiration I might otherwise
have had for him. Bitter and petulant, I stood up and pushed my way out. Several people in the audience
eyed me curiously, wondering why I was leaving a sermon that so many others were dying to attend.
Shams
KONYA, OCTOBER 17, 1244
Beholden to the peasant who dropped me off at the town center, I found myself and my horse a place to
stay. The Inn of Sugar Vendors seemed just what I needed. Of the four rooms I was shown, I chose the one
with the fewest possessions, which consisted of a sleeping mat with a moldy blanket, an oil lamp that was
sputtering its last, a sun-dried brick that I could use as a pillow, and a good view of the whole town up to
the base of the surrounding hills.
Having thus settled down, I roamed the streets, amazed at the mixture of religions, customs, and
languages permeating the air. I ran into Gypsy musicians, Arab travelers, Christian pilgrims, Jewish
merchants, Buddhist priests, Frankish troubadours, Persian artists, Chinese acrobats, Indian snake
charmers, Zoroastrian magicians, and Greek philosophers. In the slave market, I saw concubines with skin
white as milk and hefty, dark eunuchs who had seen such atrocities that they had lost their ability to speak.
In the bazaar I came across traveling barbers with bloodletting devices, fortune-tellers with crystal balls,
and magicians who swallowed fire. There were pilgrims on their way to Jerusalem and vagrants who I
suspected were runaway soldiers from the last Crusades. I heard people speak Venetian, Frankish, Saxon,
Greek, Persian, Turkish, Kurdish, Armenian, Hebrew, and several other dialects I couldn’t even
distinguish. Despite their seemingly endless differences, all of these people gave off a similar air of
incompleteness, of the works in progress that they were, each an unfinished masterwork.
The whole city was a Tower of Babel. Everything was constantly shifting, splitting, coming to light,
transpiring, thriving, dissolving, decomposing, and dying. Amid this chaos I stood in a place of
unperturbed silence and serenity, utterly indifferent to the world and yet at the same time feeling a burning
love for all the people struggling and suffering in it. As I watched the people around me, I recalled
another golden rule: It’s easy to love a perfect God, unblemished and infallible that He is. What is far
more difficult is to love fellow human beings with all their imperfections and defects. Remember, one
can only know what one is capable of loving. There is no wisdom without love. Unless we learn to love
God’s creation, we can neither truly love nor truly know God.
I roamed the narrow alleys where artisans of all ages toiled in their small, dingy stores. In every place
I visited, I overheard the townspeople talk about Rumi. How did it feel, I wondered, to be this popular?
How did it affect his ego? My mind busy with these questions, I strolled in the opposite direction from the
mosque where Rumi was preaching. Gradually the surroundings began to change. As I moved northward,
the houses became more dilapidated, the garden walls falling down, and the children more raucous and
unruly. The smells changed, too, getting heavier, more garlicky and spicy. Finally I stepped into a street
where three odors loomed in the air: sweat, perfume, and lust. I had reached the seamy side of town.
There was a ramshackle house atop the steep cobbled street, the walls supported by bamboo pillars,
the roof of thatched grass. In front of the house, a group of women sat chatting. When they saw me
approach, they eyed me curiously, looking half amused. Beside them was a garden with roses of every
color and shade imaginable and the most amazing smell. I wondered who tended to them.
I didn’t have to wait too long to learn the answer. No sooner had I reached the garden than the entrance
door of the house was flung open and a woman dashed out. She was heavy-jowled, tall, and enormously
fat. When she squinted, the way she did now, her eyes were lost in rolls of flesh. She had a thin, dark
mustache and thick sideburns. It took me a while to comprehend that she was both man and woman.
“What do you want?” the hermaphrodite asked suspiciously. Her face was in constant flux: One
moment it looked like the face of a woman; then the tide came back, replacing it with the face of a man.
I introduced myself and asked her name, but she ignored my question.
“This is no place for you,” she said, waving her hands as if I were a fly she’d like to chase away.
“Why not?”
“Don’t you see this place is a brothel? Don’t you dervishes take an oath to stay away from lust? People
think I wallow in sin here, but I give my alms and close my doors in the month of Ramadan. And now I’m
saving you. Stay away from us. This is the filthiest corner in town.”
“Filth is inside, not outside,” I objected. “Thus says the rule.”
“What are you talking about?” she croaked.
“It is one of the forty rules,” I tried to explain. “Real filth is the one inside. The rest simply washes
off. There is only one type of dirt that cannot be cleansed with pure waters, and that is the stain of
hatred and bigotry contaminating the soul. You can purify your body through abstinence and fasting,
but only love will purify your heart.”
The hermaphrodite was having none of it. “You dervishes are out of your minds. I’ve got all sorts of
customers here. But a dervish? When frogs grow beards! If I let you linger, God will raze this place to the
ground and put a curse on us for seducing a man of faith.”
I couldn’t help chuckling. “Where do you get these ridiculous ideas? Do you think God is an angry,
moody patriarch watching us from the skies above so that He can rain stones and frogs on our heads the
moment we err?”
The patron pulled at the ends of her thin mustache, giving me an annoyed look that verged on meanness.
“Don’t worry, I’m not here to visit your brothel,” I assured her. “I was just admiring your rose garden.”
“Oh, that”—the hermaphrodite shrugged dismissively—“is the creation of one of my girls, Desert
Rose.”
With that, the patron gestured to a young woman sitting among the harlots ahead of us. Delicate chin,
pearl-luster skin, and dark almond eyes clouded with worry. She was heartbreakingly beautiful. As I
looked at her, I had a sense she was someone in the process of a big transformation.
I dropped my voice to a whisper so that only the patron could hear me. “That girl is a good girl. One
day soon she’ll embark on a spiritual journey to find God. She’ll abandon this place forever. When that
day comes, do not try to stop her.”
The hermaphrodite looked at me flabbergasted before she burst out, “What the hell are you talking
about? Nobody is telling me what to do with my girls! You better get the hell out of here. Or else I’m
calling Jackal Head!”
“Who’s that?” I asked.
“Believe me, you wouldn’t want to know,” the hermaphrodite said, shaking her finger to emphasize her
point.
Hearing the name of this stranger made me shiver slightly, but I didn’t dwell on it. “Anyway, I’m
leaving,” I said. “But I’ll come back, so don’t be surprised next time you see me around. I’m not one of
those pious types who spend their whole lives hunched on prayer rugs while their eyes and hearts remain
closed to the outside world. They read the Qur’an only on the surface. But I read the Qur’an in the
budding flowers and migrating birds. I read the Breathing Qur’an secreted in human beings.”
“You mean you read people?” The patron laughed a halfhearted laugh. “What kind of nonsense is that?”
“Every man is an open book, each and every one of us a walking Qur’an. The quest for God is
ingrained in the hearts of all, be it a prostitute or a saint. Love exists within each of us from the moment
we are born and waits to be discovered from then on. That is what one of the forty rules is all about: The
whole universe is contained within a single human being—you. Everything that you see around,
including the things you might not be fond of and even the people you despise or abhor, is present
within you in varying degrees. Therefore, do not look for Sheitan outside yourself either. The devil is
not an extraordinary force that attacks from without. It is an ordinary voice within. If you get to know
yourself fully, facing with honesty and hardness both your dark and bright sides, you will arrive at a
supreme form of consciousness. When a person knows himself or herself, he or she knows God.”
Crossing her arms above her chest, the hermaphrodite leaned forward and squinted at me menacingly.
“A dervish who preaches to harlots!” she grunted. “I warn you, I’m not going to let you badger anyone
around here with your silly ideas. You better stay away from my brothel! Because if you don’t, I swear to
God, Jackal Head will cut off that sharp tongue of yours and I’ll eat it with pleasure.”
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, MAY 28, 2008
Befitting her general mood, Ella woke up sad. But not sad as in weepy and unhappy, only sad as in
unwilling to smile and take things lightly. She felt as though she had reached a milestone she was not
prepared for. As she was brewing coffee in the kitchen, she took her list of resolutions out of the drawer
and scanned through it.
Ten Things to Do Before Turning Forty
1. Improve your time management, be better organized, and be determined to make the most of your time. Buy a new day planner.
(Accomplished)
2. Add mineralsupplements and antioxidants to your diet. (Accomplished)
3. Take action for fewer wrinkles. Try alpha hydroxy products, and start using the new L’Oréal cream. (Accomplished)
4. Change the upholstery, buy new plants, get new cushions. (Accomplished)
5. Evaluate your life, values, and beliefs. (Half accomplished)
6. Eliminate meat from your diet, make a healthy menu every week, and start giving your body the respect it deserves. (Half
accomplished)
7. Start reading Rumi’s poems. (Accomplished)
8. Take the kids to a Broadway musical. (Accomplished)
9. Start writing a cookbook. ( Unaccomplished)
10. Open your heart to love!!!
Ella stood still, her eyes fixed on the tenth item on her list, not knowing whether to put a check next to it or
not. She didn’t even know what she’d meant when she wrote that. What was she thinking? “It must be the
effect of Sweet Blasphemy,” she murmured to herself. Lately she found herself frequently thinking about
love.
Dear Aziz,
Today is my birthday! I feel like I have reached a milestone in my life. They say turning forty is a defining moment, especially for
women. They also say that forty is the new thirty (and sixty is the new forty), but as much as I’d like to believe all that, it sounds too
far-fetched to me. I mean, who are we kidding? Forty is forty! I guess now I’ll have “more” of everything—more knowledge, more
wisdom, and of course more wrinkles and gray hair.
Birthdays have always made me happy, but this morning I woke up with heaviness in my chest, asking questions too large for
someone who hadn’t even had her morning coffee yet. I kept wondering, is the way I’ve lived my life the way I want to continue from
now on?
And then a fearful feeling came over me. What if both a yes and a no might generate equally disastrous consequences? So I found
another answer: maybe!
Warm wishes,
Ella
P.S. Sorry I couldn’t write a more cheerful e-mail. I don’t know why I’m down in the dumps today. I can’t
give you a reason. (That is, other than turning forty. I guess this is what they call midlife crisis.)
Dear Ella,
Happy birthday! Forty is a most beautiful age for both men and women. Did you know that in mystic thought forty symbolizes the
ascent from one level to a higher one and spiritual awakening? When we mourn we mourn for forty days. When a baby is born it takes
forty days for him to get ready to start life on earth. And when we are in love we need to wait for forty days to be sure of our feelings.
The Flood of Noah lasted forty days, and while the waters destroyed life, they also washed all impurity away and enabled human
beings to make a new, fresh start. In Islamic mysticism there are forty degrees between man and God. Likewise, there are four basic
stages of consciousness and ten degrees in each, making forty levels in total. Jesus went into the wilderness for forty days and nights.
Muhammad was forty years old when he received the call to become a prophet. Buddha meditated under a linden tree for forty days.
Not to mention the forty rules of Shams.
You receive a new mission at forty, a new lease on life! You have reached a most auspicious number. Congratulations! And don’t
worry about getting old. There are no wrinkles or gray hair strong enough to defy the power of forty!
Warmly,
Aziz
Desert Rose the Harlot
KONYA, OCTOBER 17, 1244
Brothels have existed since the beginning of time. And so have women like me. But there is something that
amazes me: Why is it that although people say they hate seeing women prostitute themselves, the same
people make life hard for a prostitute who wants to repent and start life anew? It is as if they are telling us
they are sorry that we have fallen so low, but now that we are where we are, we should stay there
forever. I don’t know why this is. All I know is, some people feed on the miseries of others and they don’t
like it when there is one less miserable person on the face of the earth. But no matter what they say or do,
I am going to walk out of this place one day.
This morning I woke up bursting with a desire to listen to the great Rumi preach. Had I told the patron
the truth and asked permission, she would have made fun of me. “Since when do whores go to mosques?”
she would have said, laughing so hard her round face would have turned crimson.
That’s why I lied. After that hairless dervish left, the patron looked so preoccupied I sensed it was the
right time to go and talk. She is always more approachable when distracted. I told her I needed to go to
the bazaar to run some errands. She believed me. After nine years of my working like a dog for her, she
does.
“Only on one condition,” she said. “Sesame is coming with you.”
That wasn’t a problem. I liked Sesame. A big, hefty man with the mind of a child, he was reliable and
honest to the point of simplicity. How he survived in such a cruel world was a mystery to me. Nobody
knew what his real name was, perhaps not even himself. We had named him so because of his infatuation
with sesame halva. When a harlot from the brothel needed to go out, Sesame accompanied her like a silent
shadow. He was the best guard I could have wished for.
The two of us took the dusty road winding through the orchards. When we reached the first intersection,
I asked Sesame to wait for me, and I disappeared behind a bush where I had hidden a bag full of men’s
clothes.
It was harder than I thought to dress up as a man. Wrapping long scarves around my breasts, I flattened
my chest. Then I put on baggy trousers, a cotton vest, a long maroon robe, and a turban. Finally I covered
half my face with a scarf, hoping to resemble an Arab traveler.
When I walked back toward him, Sesame flinched, looking puzzled.
“Let’s go,” I urged him, and when he didn’t budge, I uncovered my face. “My dear, haven’t you
recognized me?”
“Desert Rose, is that you?” Sesame exclaimed, putting one hand on his mouth like a child in awe. “Why
did you dress up like that?”
“Can you keep a secret?”
Sesame nodded, his eyes widening with excitement.
“All right,” I whispered. “We are going to a mosque. But don’t tell the patron.”
Sesame’s bottom lip quivered. “No, no. We were going to the bazaar.”
“Yes, dear, later. First we are going to listen to the great Rumi.”
Sesame panicked slightly, as I knew he would. The change in plans was unsettling to him. “Please, this
means a lot to me,” I begged. “If you agree and promise not to tell anyone about it, I’ll buy you a huge
chunk of halva.”
“Halva.” Sesame clucked his tongue with delight, as if the word alone had left a sweet taste in his
mouth.
And with sweet expectation, we set off toward the mosque where Rumi was going to speak.
I was born in a small village near Nicaea. My mother always said to me, “You were born in the right
place, but I am afraid it was under the wrong star.” The times were bad, unpredictable. From one year to
the next, nothing remained the same. First there were rumors of the Crusaders coming back. We heard
terrible stories about the atrocities they committed in Constantinople, ransacking the mansions,
demolishing the icons inside chapels and churches. Next we heard about Seljuk attacks. And before the
tales of terror of the Seljuk army faded, those of the ruthless Mongols started. The name and the face of
the enemy changed, but the fear of being destroyed by outsiders remained as steady as snow on Mount Ida.
My parents were bakers and good Christians. One of my earliest memories is the smell of bread out of
the oven. We weren’t rich. Even as a child, I knew that. But we weren’t poor either. I had seen the stare in
the eyes of the poor when they came to the bakery begging for crumbs. Every night before going to sleep, I
thanked the Lord for not sending me to bed hungry. It felt like talking to a friend. For back then God was
my friend.
When I was seven, my mother became pregnant. Looking back today, I suspect she might have had
several miscarriages before that, but I didn’t know anything about such things. I was so innocent that if
anyone asked me how babies were made, I would have said God kneaded them out of soft, sweet dough.
But the bread baby that God kneaded for my mother must have been enormous, because before long her
belly swelled up, big and tight. Mother had become so huge she could barely move. The midwife said her
body was retaining water, but that didn’t sound like a bad thing to me.
What neither my mother nor the midwife knew was, there wasn’t one baby but three. All were boys. My
brothers had waged a war inside my mother’s body. One of the triplets had strangled his brother with his
umbilical cord, and as if to take revenge, the dead baby had blocked the passage, thus preventing the
others from coming out. For four days my mother remained in labor. Night and day we listened to her
screams until we heard her no more.
Unable to save my mother, the midwife did her best to save my brothers. Taking a pair of scissors, she
cut my mom’s belly open, but in the end only one baby survived. This is how my brother was born. My
father never forgave him, and when the baby was baptized, he did not attend the ceremony.
With my mother gone and my father turned into a sullen, bitter man, life was never the same. Things
rapidly deteriorated at the bakery. We lost our customers. Afraid of becoming poor and having to beg
someday, I started to hide bread rolls under my bed, where they would get dry and stale. But it was my
brother who really suffered. I at least had been loved and taken good care of in the past. He never had any
of that. It broke my heart to see him being mistreated, and yet a part of me was relieved, even grateful, that
it wasn’t I who had become the target of my father’s fury. I wish I had protected my brother. Everything
would be different then, and I wouldn’t be in a brothel in Konya today. Life is so strange.
A year later my father remarried. The only difference in my brother’s life was that whereas before it
was my father who ill-treated him, now it was my father and his new wife who did so. He started to run
away from home, only to come back with the worst habits and the wrong friends. One day my father beat
him so badly he almost killed him. After that, the boy changed. There was a cold, cruel stare in his eyes
that wasn’t there before. I knew he had something in mind, but it never occurred to me what a horrible
plan he was brewing. I wish I had known. I wish I could have prevented the tragedy.
Then, one morning in spring, my father and stepmother were found dead, killed with rat poison. As
soon as the incident became public, everyone suspected my brother. When the guards started asking
questions, he ran away in panic. I never saw him again. And just like that, I was alone in the world.
Unable to stay at home where I still sensed my mother’s smell, unable to work at the bakery where
disturbing memories hovered in the air, I decided to go to Constantinople to stay with an old spinster aunt
who had now become my closest relative. I was thirteen.
I took a carriage to Constantinople. I was the youngest passenger on board and the only one traveling
alone. A few hours on the road, we were stopped by a gang of robbers. They took everything—suitcases,
clothes, boots, belts, and jewelry, even the driver’s sausages. Having nothing to give them, I stood aside
quietly, certain that they would do me no harm. But just when they were about to leave, the gang leader
turned to me and asked, “Are you a virgin, dainty thing?”
I blushed and refused to answer such an improper question. Little did I know that my blushing was the
answer he wanted.
“Let’s go!” the gang leader shouted. “Take the horses and the girl!”
While I resisted them in tears, none of the other passengers even tried to help me. The robbers took me
to a thick, dense forest, where I was surprised to see they had created a whole village. There were
women and children. Ducks, goats, and pigs were all over the place. It looked like an idyllic village,
except it was inhabited by criminals.
Soon I understood why the gang leader had asked me if I was a virgin. The chief of the village was
severely ill with nervous fever. He had been in bed for a long time, with red spots all over his body,
trying countless treatments to no avail. Recently someone had convinced him that if he slept with a virgin,
his illness would be transmitted to her and he would be clean and cured.
There are things in my life I don’t want to remember. My time in the forest is one of them. Even today,
whenever the forest comes to my mind, I think of the pine trees and only the pine trees. I preferred sitting
alone under those trees to the company of the women in the village, most of whom were the wives or
daughters of the robbers. There were also a number of harlots who had come there on their own. I
couldn’t understand for the life of me why they didn’t run away. I was determined to do so.
There were carriages crossing the forest, most of them belonging to the nobility. It was a mystery to me
why they were not robbed, until I realized that some carriage drivers bribed the robbers before passing
through the forest and in return got the right to travel safely. Once I figured out how things worked, I cut
my own deal. After stopping a carriage heading to the big city, I pleaded with the driver to take me with
him. He asked too much money, although he knew I had none. I paid him the only way I knew how.
Only long after I arrived in Constantinople would I comprehend why the harlots in the forest would
never run away. The city was worse. It was ruthless. I never looked for my old aunt. Now that I was
fallen, I knew a proper lady like her wouldn’t want me. I was on my own. It didn’t take the city long to
crush my spirits and ruin my body. Suddenly I was in another world altogether—a world of malice, rape,
brutality, and disease. I had successive abortions until I was damaged so badly that I stopped having
periods and could no longer conceive.
I saw things on those streets for which I have no words. After I left the city, I traveled with soldiers,
performers, and Gypsies, serving the needs of all. Then a man called Jackal Head found me and brought
me to this brothel in Konya. The patron wasn’t interested in where I came from as long as I was in good
shape. She was delighted to learn I couldn’t have babies and would not cause her any problems in that
respect. To refer to my barrenness, she named me “Desert,” and to embellish that name somewhat, she
added “Rose,” which was fine with me, as I adored roses.
Which is how I think of faith—like a hidden rose garden where I once roamed and inhaled its perfumed
smells but can no longer enter. I want God to be my friend again. With that longing I am circling that
garden, searching for an entrance, hoping to find a gate that will let me in.
When Sesame and I reached the mosque, I couldn’t believe my eyes. Men of all ages and professions
occupied every corner, even the place in the back that would normally be reserved for women. I was
about to give up and leave when I noticed a beggar relinquish his seat and inch his way out. Thanking my
lucky stars, I wriggled into his space, leaving Sesame outside.
This is how I found myself listening to the great Rumi in a mosque full of men. I didn’t even want to
think what could happen if they found out there was a woman amid them, let alone a harlot. Chasing off all
dark thoughts, I gave my full attention to the sermon.
“God created suffering so that joy might appear through its opposite,” Rumi said. “Things become
manifest through opposites. Since God has no opposite, He remains hidden.”
As the preacher talked, his voice rose and swelled like a mountain stream fed by the melting snow.
“Look at the abasement of the earth and the exaltation of the heavens. Know that all the states of the world
are like this: flooding and drought, peace and war. Whatever happens, do not forget, nothing God has
created is in vain, whether wrath or forbearance, honesty or guile.”
Sitting there, I saw that everything served a purpose. My mother’s pregnancy and the war in her womb,
my brother’s incurable loneliness, even the murder of my father and stepmother, my dreadful days in the
forest, and every brutality I saw on the streets of Constantinople—they each contributed, in their own
way, to my story. Behind all hardships was a larger scheme. I couldn’t make it out clearly, but I could feel
it with my whole heart. Listening to Rumi in a packed mosque on that afternoon, I felt a cloud of
tranquillity descend over me, as delightful and soothing as the sight of my mother baking bread.
Hasan the Beggar
KONYA, OCTOBER 17, 1244
Bristling with irritation, I sat under the maple tree. I continued to be angry at Rumi for his flamboyant
speech on suffering—a subject he clearly knew little about. The shadow of the minaret inched its way
across the street. Half dozing, half eyeing the passersby, I was about to fall asleep when I caught sight of a
dervish I had never seen before. Dressed in black rags, holding a large staff in his hand, with no facial
hair and a tiny silver earring in one ear, he looked so different that I couldn’t help fixing my gaze upon
him.
As his eyes scanned left and right, it didn’t take the dervish long to notice me. Instead of ignoring my
presence, the way people who saw me for the first time always did, he put his right hand on his heart and
greeted me as if we were two old friends. I was so stunned I looked around just to make sure he wasn’t
greeting someone else. But there was only me and the maple tree. Dazed, confused, I nonetheless put my
hand on my heart and greeted him back.
Slowly the dervish walked toward me. I lowered my gaze, expecting him to leave a copper coin in my
bowl or hand me a piece of bread. But instead he knelt down to my eye level.
“Selamun aleykum, beggar,” he said.
“Aleykum selam, dervish,” I responded. My voice sounded hoarse and strange to me. It had been such a
long time since I’d felt the need to speak to anyone that I had almost forgotten what my voice sounded
like.
He introduced himself as Shams of Tabriz and asked my name.
I laughed. “What does a man like me need a name for?”
“Everybody has a name,” he objected. “God has countless names. Of those, only ninety-nine are known
to us. If God has so many names, how can a human being who is the very reflection of Him go around
without a name?”
I didn’t know how to respond to that and so didn’t even try. Instead I conceded, “I had a wife and a
mother once. They used to call me Hasan.”
“Hasan it is, then.” The dervish nodded. Then, to my surprise, he gave me a silver mirror. “Keep it,” he
said. “A good man in Baghdad gave it to me, but you need it more than I do. It will remind you that you
bear God within you.”
Before I found the chance to say anything in return, a commotion broke out in the background. The first
thing that came to my mind was that a pickpocket had been caught in the mosque. But when the shouts
grew louder and fiercer, I knew that it had to be something bigger. No pickpocket would create such an
uproar.
We found out soon enough. A woman, a known prostitute, had been found in the mosque dressed up as a
man. A group of people were shoving her out, chanting, “Lash the deceiver! Lash the whore!”
In this state the angry mob reached the street. I caught sight of the young woman in men’s clothing. Her
face was pale as death and her almond eyes terrified. I had seen many lynchings before. It never ceased to
amaze me how dramatically people changed when they joined a mob. Ordinary men with no history of
violence—artisans, vendors, or peddlers—turned aggressive to the point of murder when they banded
together. Lynchings were common and ended with the corpses put on display to deter others.
“Poor woman,” I muttered to Shams of Tabriz, but when I turned to him for a response, there was no
one standing there.
I caught sight of the dervish darting toward the mob, like a flaming arrow shot straight up into the sky. I
jumped to my feet and rushed to catch up with him.
When he reached the head of the procession, Shams raised his staff like a flag and yelled at the top of
his voice, “Stop it, people! Halt!”
Baffled, and suddenly silent, the men stared at him in wonder.
“You should all be ashamed of yourselves!” Shams of Tabriz shouted as he struck the ground with his
staff. “Thirty men against one woman. Is that fair?”
“She doesn’t deserve fairness,” said a square-faced, burly man with a lazy eye, who seemed to have
proclaimed himself the leader of this impromptu group. I recognized him instantly. He was a security
guard named Baybars, a man all the beggars in town knew well for his cruelty and rapacity.
“This woman here dressed up as a man and sneaked into the mosque to deceive good Muslims,”
Baybars said.
“Are you telling me you want to punish a person for going into a mosque? Is that a crime?” Shams of
Tabriz asked, his voice dripping with scorn.
The question created a momentary lull. Apparently nobody had thought of it that way.
“She is a whore!” yelled another man, who looked so enraged that his face had turned a dark scarlet
color. “She has no place in a holy mosque!”
That seemed enough to inflame the group again. “Whore! Whore!” a few people at the back chanted in
unison. “Let’s get the whore!”
As if that were an order, a young lad leaped forward and grabbed the woman’s turban, yanking it
forcefully. The turban came loose, and the woman’s long blond hair, bright as sunflowers, fell down in
graceful waves. We all held our breath, astonished by her youth and beauty.
Shams must have recognized the mixed feelings in the air, for he reproached them without skipping a
beat: “You have to make up your minds, brothers. Do you really despise this woman, or do you in fact
desire her?”
With that, the dervish caught the harlot’s hand and pulled her toward him, away from the young lad and
the mob. She hid behind him, like a little girl hiding behind her mother’s skirts.
“You are making a big mistake,” the leader of the group said, raising his voice above the murmur of the
crowd. “You are a stranger in this town and don’t know our ways. Stay out of this matter.”
Someone else chimed in. “What kind of a dervish are you anyway? Don’t you have anything better to do
than to defend the interests of a whore?”
Shams of Tabriz was quiet for a moment, as if considering the questions. He displayed no temper,
remaining invariably tranquil. Then he said, “But how did you notice her in the first place? You go to a
mosque but pay more attention to the people around you than to God? If you were the good believers you
claim to be, you would not have noticed this woman even if she were naked. Now, go back to the sermon
and do a better job this time.”
An awkward silence descended on the entire street. Leaves skittered along the sidewalk, and for a
moment they were the only things that moved.
“Come on, you lot! Off you go, back to the sermon.” Shams of Tabriz waved his staff, shooing the men
away like flies.
They did not all turn and walk away, but they did take a few steps back, swaying unsteadily, puzzled as
to what to do next. A few of them were looking in the direction of the mosque as if considering returning.
It was exactly then that the harlot mustered the courage to get out from behind the dervish. Fast as a rabbit,
she took to her heels, her long hair flying every which way while she scurried into the closest side street.
Only two men attempted to chase her. But Shams of Tabriz blocked their path, swinging his staff under
their feet with such suddenness and force that they tumbled over and fell down. A few passersby laughed
at the sight, and so did I.
Embarrassed and stupefied, the two men managed to get to their feet again, but by that time the harlot
had long vanished and the dervish was walking away, his work here done.
Suleiman the Drunk
KONYA, OCTOBER 17, 1244
Before the commotion I was snoozing peacefully with my back to the tavern wall, and then the racket
outside made me nearly jump out of my skin.
“What’s going on?” I screamed as my eyes snapped open. “Did the Mongols attack us?”
There was a ripple of laughter. I turned around and found several other customers making fun of me.
Dirty bastards!
“Don’t you worry, old drunk!” yelled Hristos, the tavern owner. “No Mongols coming after you. It’s
Rumi passing by with an army of admirers.”
I went to the window and looked out. Sure enough, there they were—an excited procession of disciples
and admirers repeatedly chanting, “God is great! God is great!” In the middle of it all was the erect figure
of Rumi, mounted on a white horse, radiating strength and confidence. I opened the window, ducked my
head out, and watched them. Moving at a pace no faster than a snail’s, the procession came very near. In
fact, some of the crowd were so close that I could easily have touched a few heads. Suddenly I had a
brilliant idea. I was going to snatch off some people’s turbans!
I grabbed the wooden back scratcher that belongs to Hristos. Holding the window open with one hand
and the scratcher in the other, I leaned forward, managing to reach the turban of a man in the crowd. I was
just about to pull the turban off when another man inadvertently looked up and saw me.
“Selamun aleykum,” I saluted, smiling from ear to ear.
“A Muslim in a tavern! Shame on you!” the man roared. “Don’t you know wine is the handiwork of
Sheitan?”
I opened my mouth to answer, but before I could make a sound, something sharp whizzed by my head. I
realized in sheer horror that it was a stone. If I hadn’t ducked at the last second, it would have cracked my
skull. Instead it had shot through the open window, landing on the table of the Persian merchant sitting
behind me. Too tipsy to comprehend what had happened, the merchant held the stone in his hand,
examining it as if it were an obscure message from the skies.
“Suleiman, close that window and go back to your table!” Hristos bellowed, his voice hoarse with
worry.
“Did you see what happened?” I said as I staggered back toward my table. “Someone hurled a stone at
me. They could have killed me!”
Hristos raised an eyebrow. “I’m sorry, but what were you expecting? Don’t you know there are people
who don’t want to see a Muslim in a tavern? And here you are displaying yourself, reeking of alcohol,
your nose glowing like a red lantern.”
“S-so what?” I stuttered. “Am I not a human being?”
Hristos patted me on the shoulder as if to say, Don’t be so touchy.
“You know, this is exactly why I abhor religion. All sorts of them! Religious people are so confident of
having God by their side that they think they are superior to everyone else,” I said.
Hristos did not respond. He was a religious man, but also a skilled tavern owner who knew how to
soothe an incensed customer. He brought me another carafe of red wine and watched me as I guzzled it.
Outside, a wild wind blew, slamming shut the windows and scattering dry leaves left and right. For a
moment we stood still, listening carefully, as if there were a melody to be heard.
“I don’t understand why wine was forbidden in this world but promised in heaven,” I said. “If it’s as
bad as they claim, why would they serve it in paradise?”
“Questions, questions …” Hristos murmured as he threw his hands up. “You are always full of
questions. Do you have to question everything?”
“Of course I do. That’s why we were given a brain, don’t you think?”
“Suleiman, I have known you for a long time. You are not just any customer to me. You are my friend.
And I worry about you.”
“I’ll be fine—” I said, but Hristos interrupted me.
“You are a good man, but your tongue is as sharp as a dagger. That’s what worries me. There are all
sorts of people in Konya. And it’s no secret that some of them don’t think highly of a Muslim who has
taken to drink. You need to learn to be careful in public. Hide your ways, and watch what you say.”
I grinned. “May we top off this speech with a poem from Khayyám?”
Hristos heaved a sigh, but the Persian merchant who had overheard me exclaimed cheerfully, “Yes, we
want a poem from Khayyám.”
Other customers joined in, giving me a big round of applause. Motivated and slightly provoked, I
jumped onto a table and began to recite:
“Did God set grapes a-growing, do you think,
And at the same time make it a sin to drink?”
The Persian merchant yelled, “Of course not! That wouldn’t make any sense!”
“Give thanks to Him who foreordained it thus—
Surely He loves to hear the glasses clink!”
If there was one thing these many years of drinking had taught me, it was that different people drank
differently. I knew people who drank gallons every night, and all they did was get merry, sing songs, and
then doze off. But then there were others who turned into monsters with a few drops. If the same drink
made some merry and tipsy and others wicked and aggressive, shouldn’t we hold the drinkers responsible
instead of the drink?
“Drink! for you know not whence you came, nor why;
Drink! for you know not why you go, nor where.”
Another round of applause followed. Even Hristos joined the excitement. In the Jewish quarter of
Konya, in a tavern owned by a Christian, we, a mixed bunch of wine lovers of all faiths, raised our
glasses and toasted together, hard though it was to believe, to a God who could love and forgive us even
when we ourselves clearly failed to do so.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, MAY 31, 2008
“Better safe than sorry,” said the Web site. “Check his shirts for lipstick stains, see if he comes home
smelling of unfamiliar perfumes.”
This was the first time Ella Rubinstein had taken an online test, titled “How to Tell If Your Husband Is
Cheating on You!” Although she found the questions tacky, by now she knew that life itself could
occasionally feel like one big cliché.
In spite of her final test score, Ella didn’t want to confront David on this matter. She still had not asked
him where he’d been on the nights he hadn’t come home. These days she spent most of her time reading
Sweet Blasphemy, using the novel as an excuse to cover up her silence. Her mind was so distracted that it
was taking her longer than usual to finish the book. Still, she was enjoying the story, and with every new
rule of Shams’s she mulled her life over.
When the children were around, she acted normal. They acted normal. However, the moment she and
David were alone, she caught her husband looking at her curiously, as if wondering what kind of wife
would avoid asking her husband where he’d spent the night. But the truth was that Ella didn’t want a piece
of information she wouldn’t know how to handle. The less she knew about her husband’s flings, the less
they would occupy her mind, she thought. It was true what they say about ignorance. It was bliss.
The only time that bliss had been disrupted was last Christmas, when a survey from a local hotel
arrived in their mailbox, addressed directly to David. Customer service wanted to know whether he was
happy with his stays. Ella left the letter on the table, on top of a pile of mail, and that evening she watched
him take the letter out of the opened envelope and read it.
“Ah, a guest evaluation form! The last thing I needed,” David said, managing a half smile for her. “We
held a dental conference there last year. They must have included all the participants on their customer
list.”
She believed him. At least the part of her that didn’t like to rock the boat did. The other part of her was
cynical and distrustful. It was that same part that the next day found the hotel’s number and dialed it, just
to hear what she already knew: Neither this year nor the one before had they ever hosted a dental
conference.
Deep inside, Ella blamed herself. She hadn’t aged well, and she’d gained considerable weight over the
last six years. With every new pound, her sexual drive had declined a bit further. The cooking classes
rendered it more difficult to shed the extra pounds, though there were women in her group who cooked
more often, and better, and still remained half her size.
When she looked back at her life, she realized that rebellion had never suited her. She had never
smoked weed with boys behind closed doors, gotten kicked out of bars, used morning-after pills, thrown
fits, or lied to her mother. Never cut class. Never had teen sex. All around her, girls her age were having
abortions or putting their out-of-wedlock babies up for adoption, while she observed their stories as
though watching a TV program on famine in Ethiopia. It saddened Ella that such tragedies were unfolding
in the world, but the truth was that she never saw herself as sharing the same universe with those
unfortunate ones.
She had never been a party girl, not even as a teenager. She preferred to sit at home and read a good
book on a Friday night rather than whoop it up with strangers at some wild party.
“Why can’t you be like Ella?” the mothers in the neighborhood asked their daughters. “See, she never
gets herself in trouble.”
While their mothers adored her, the kids themselves saw her as a nerd with no sense of humor. No
wonder she wasn’t very popular in high school. Once a classmate told her, “You know what your
problem is? You take life so seriously. You’re fucking boring!”
She listened carefully and said she would think about that.
Even her hairstyle hadn’t changed much over the years—long, straight, honey-blond hair that she pulled
into an unrelenting bun or braided down her back. She wore little makeup, just a touch of reddish brown
lipstick and a moss green eyeliner, which according to her daughter did more to hide than to bring out the
gray-blue of her eyes. In any event, she never managed to draw two perfectly curved lines with the
eyeliner and often went out with the line on one eyelid looking thicker than that on the other.
Ella suspected that there must be something wrong with her. She was either too intrusive and pushy
(with regard to Jeannette’s marriage plans) or too passive and docile (with regard to her husband’s
flings). There was an Ella-the-control-freak and an Ella-the-hopelessly-meek. She could never tell which
one was about to emerge, or when.
And then there was a third Ella, observing everything quietly, waiting for her time to come. It was this
Ella who told her she was calm to the point of numbness but that underneath there was a strangled self,
harboring a fast freshet of anger and rebellion. If she kept going like this, the third Ella warned, she was
bound to explode someday. It was just a matter of time.
Contemplating these issues on the last day of May, Ella did something she hadn’t done in a long while.
She prayed. She asked God to either provide her with a love that would absorb her whole being or else
make her tough and careless enough not to mind the absence of love in her life.
“Whichever one You choose, please be quick,” she added as an afterthought. “You might have
forgotten, but I’m already forty. And as You can see, I don’t carry my years well.”
Desert Rose the Harlot
KONYA, OCTOBER 17, 1244
Breathless, I ran and ran along the narrow alley, unable to look back. My lungs burning, my chest
pounding, when I finally reached the busy bazaar, I dodged behind a wall, almost collapsing. Only then
could I muster the courage to look behind me. To my great surprise and relief, there was only one person
following me: Sesame. He stopped beside me, out of breath, his hands dangling limply at his sides, his
expression bewildered and vexed, unable to comprehend why all of a sudden I had started running like
crazy through the streets of Konya.
Everything had happened so fast that it was only in the bazaar that I could put the pieces together. One
minute I was sitting in the mosque, absorbed in the sermon, drinking in Rumi’s pearls of wisdom. In my
trance I failed to notice that the lad next to me had accidentally stepped on the ends of the scarf covering
my face. Before I knew it, the scarf came loose and my turban slid aside, exposing my face and a bit of my
hair. I fixed the scarf swiftly and continued listening to Rumi, confident that nobody had noticed anything.
But when I raised my eyes again, I saw a young man in the front row looking at me intently. Square face,
lazy eye, sharp nose, sneering mouth. I recognized him. He was Baybars.
Baybars was one of those pesky customers none of the girls in the brothel wanted to sleep with. Some
men have a way of wanting to sleep with prostitutes and yet at the same time insulting them. He was such
a man. Always cracking lewd jokes, he had a terrible temper. Once he beat a girl so badly that even the
boss, who loved money more than anything, had to ask him to leave and never come back. But he kept
returning. At least for a few more months. Then, for some reason unbeknownst to me, he stopped visiting
the brothel, and we didn’t hear from him again. Now there he was, sitting in the front row, having grown a
full beard like a devout man but still with the same fierce sparkle in his eyes.
I averted my gaze. But it was too late. He had recognized me.
Baybars whispered something to the man next to him, and then the two of them turned around and stared
at me. Next they pointed me out to someone else, and one after another all the men in that row stared in my
direction. I felt my face blush and my heart race, but I couldn’t budge. Instead I clung to the childish hope
that if I stayed still and closed my eyes, the darkness would engulf us all, leaving nothing to worry about.
When I dared to open my eyes again, Baybars was pushing his way through the crowd toward me. I
made a dash for the door, but it was impossible to escape, surrounded as I was by a thick sea of people.
In a flash Baybars had reached me, so menacingly close I could smell his breath. Grabbing me by the arm,
he said between clenched teeth, “What is a harlot doing here? Don’t you have any shame?”
“Please … please, let me go,” I stammered, but I don’t think he even heard me.
His friends joined him. Tough, scary, confident, disdainful fellows, reeking of anger and vinegar,
raining insults on me. Everyone around turned to see what the commotion was about, and a few people
tsk-tsked disapprovingly, but nobody intervened. My body as listless as a lump of dough, I meekly let
them push me toward the exit. Once we reached the street, I hoped, Sesame would come to my aid, and if
worst came to worst, I would run away. But no sooner had we stepped into the street than the men grew
more belligerent and aggressive. I realized in horror that in the mosque, out of respect for the preacher
and the community, they had been careful not to raise their voices or shove me around, but outside on the
street there was nothing to stop them.
I had been through harder things in my life, and yet I doubt if I had ever felt so dejected before. After
years of hesitation, today I had taken a step toward God, and how had He responded? By kicking me out
of His house!
“I should never have gone there,” I said to Sesame, my voice cracking like thin ice. “They’re right, you
know. A harlot has no place in a mosque or a church or in any of His houses.”
“Don’t say that!”
When I turned around to see who had said this, I couldn’t believe my eyes. It was him, the wandering
hairless dervish. Sesame broke into a wide smile, delighted to see him again. I lurched forward to kiss his
hands, but he stopped me midway. “Please don’t.”
“But how can I thank you? I owe you so much,” I beseeched.
He shrugged and looked uninterested. “You owe me nothing,” he said. “We are indebted to no other
than Him.”
He introduced himself as Shams of Tabriz and then said the strangest thing ever: “Some people start
life with a perfectly glowing aura but then lose color and fade. You seem to be one of them. Once your
aura was whiter than lilies with specks of yellow and pink, but it faded over time. Now it is a pale
brown. Don’t you miss your original colors? Wouldn’t you like to unite with your essence?”
I looked at him, feeling utterly lost in his words.
“Your aura has lost its shine because all these years you have convinced yourself that you are dirty
inside and out.”
“I am dirty,” I said, biting my lip. “Don’t you know what I do for a living?”
“Allow me to tell you a story,” Shams said. And this is what he told me:
One day a prostitute passed by a street dog. The animal was panting under the hot sun, thirsty and
helpless. The prostitute immediately took off her shoe and filled it with water from the nearest well for
the dog. Then she went on her way. The next day she ran into a Sufi who was a man of great wisdom.
As soon as he saw her, he kissed her hands. She was shocked. But he told her that her kindness toward
the dog had been so genuine that all her sins had been pardoned there and then.
I understood what Shams of Tabriz was trying to tell me, but something inside me refused to believe
him. So I said, “Let me assure you, even if I fed all the dogs in Konya, it wouldn’t be enough for my
redemption.”
“You cannot know that; only God can. Besides, what makes you think any of those men who pushed you
out of the mosque today are closer to God?”
“Even if they are not closer to God,” I replied, unconvinced, “who will tell them that? Will you?”
But the dervish shook his head. “No, that’s not the way the system works. It is you who needs to tell it
to them.”
“Do you think they would listen to me? Those men hate me.”
“They will listen,” he said determinedly. “Because there is no such thing as ‘them,’ just as there is no
‘I.’ All you need to do is keep in mind how everything and everyone in this universe is interconnected.
We are not hundreds and thousands of different beings. We are all One.”
I waited for him to explain, but instead he continued: “It’s one of the forty rules. If you want to change
the way others treat you, you should first change the way you treat yourself. Unless you learn to love
yourself, fully and sincerely, there is no way you can be loved. Once you achieve that stage, however,
be thankful for every thorn that others might throw at you. It is a sign that you will soon be showered
in roses.” He paused briefly and then added, “How can you blame others for disrespecting you when you
think of yourself as unworthy of respect?”
I stood there unable to say a word as I felt my grip on what was real slip away. I thought about all the
men I had slept with—the way they smelled, the way their callused hands felt, the way they cried when
they came.… I had seen nice boys turn into monsters and monsters turn into nice boys. Once I had a
customer who had the habit of spitting on prostitutes while he had sex with them. “Dirty,” he would say as
he spit into my mouth and all over my face. “You dirty whore.”
And here was this dervish telling me I was cleaner than fresh springwater. It felt like a tasteless joke,
but when I forced myself to laugh, the sound didn’t pass through my throat, and I ended up suppressing a
sob.
“The past is a whirlpool. If you let it dominate your present moment, it will suck you in,” said Shams as
if he had read my thoughts. “Time is just an illusion. What you need is to live this very moment. That is all
that matters.”
Upon saying that, he took out a silk handkerchief from the inside pocket of his robe. “Keep it,” he said.
“A good man in Baghdad gave it to me, but you need it more than I do. It will remind you that your heart is
pure and that you bear God within you.”
With that, the dervish grabbed his staff and stood up, ready to go. “Just walk out of that brothel.”
“Where? How? I have no place to go.”
“That’s not a problem,” Shams said, his eyes gleaming. “Fret not where the road will take you.
Instead concentrate on the first step. That’s the hardest part and that’s what you are responsible for.
Once you take that step let everything do what it naturally does and the rest will follow. Do not go
with the flow. Be the flow.”
I nodded. I didn’t need to ask in order to understand that this, too, was one of the rules.
Suleiman the Drunk
KONYA, OCTOBER 17, 1244
Before midnight I downed my last drink and left the tavern.
“Remember what I said. Watch your tongue,” Hristos cautioned as he waved good-bye.
I nodded, feeling fortunate to have a friend who cared about me. But as soon as I stepped into the dark,
empty street, I was seized by a kind of exhaustion such as I had never felt before. I wished I had taken a
bottle of wine with me. I could have used a drink.
As I tottered with my boots clacking on the broken cobblestones, the sight of the men in Rumi’s
procession crossed my mind. It pained me to recall the flicker of loathing in their eyes. If there was one
thing I hated most in the world, it was prudishness. I had been reprimanded by prim and proper people so
many times that even the memory of them was enough to send a shiver down my spine.
Struggling with these thoughts, I turned a corner and entered a side street. It was darker here because of
the massive trees towering above. As if that weren’t enough, the moon suddenly hid behind a cloud,
shrouding me in thick, dense darkness. Otherwise I would have noticed the two security guards
approaching me.
“Selamun aleykum,” I chimed, my voice coming out too merrily in the attempt to hide my anxiety.
But the guards didn’t return my greeting. Instead they asked me what I was doing out on the streets at
this late hour.
“Just walking,” I mumbled.
We stood face-to-face, anchored in an awkward silence pierced only by the howling of dogs far away.
One of the men took a step toward me and sniffed the air. “It stinks around here,” he blurted out.
“Yeah, it reeks of wine,” the other guard confirmed.
I decided to treat the situation lightly. “Don’t worry yourselves. The stench is only metaphorical. Since
it is only metaphorical wine that we Muslims are allowed to drink, the smell must also be metaphorical.”
“What the hell is he raving about?” the first guard grumbled.
Just then the moon came out from behind the cloud, covering us with its soft, pallid light. I could now
see the man facing me. He had a square face with a protruding chin, ice blue eyes, and a sharp nose. He
could have been handsome were it not for his lazy eye and the permanent scowl on his face.
“What are you doing on the streets at this hour?” the man repeated. “Where are you coming from, and
where are you going?”
I couldn’t help it. “These are profound questions, son. If I knew the answers, I would have solved the
mystery of our purpose in this world.”
“Are you making fun of me, you filth?” the guard demanded, frowning, and before I knew what was
happening, he took out a whip, cracking it in the air.
His gestures were so dramatically exaggerated that I chuckled. The next thing he did was to bring the
whip down on my chest. The strike was so sudden that I lost my balance and fell.
“Perhaps this will teach you some manners,” the guard retorted as he passed his whip from one hand to
the other. “Don’t you know drinking is a major sin?”
Even when I felt the warmth of my own blood, even as my head swirled in a sea of pain, I still couldn’t
believe I had been lashed in the middle of the street by a man young enough to be my son.
“Then go ahead and punish me,” I retorted. “If God’s paradise is reserved for people of your kind, I’d
rather burn in hell anyhow.”
In a fit of rage, the young guard started to whip me with all his might. I covered my face with my hands,
but it didn’t help much. A merry old song popped into my mind, forcing its way past my bloodied lips.
Determined not to show my misery, I sang louder and louder with every crack of the whip:
“Kiss me, my beloved, peel my heart down to the core,
Your lips are as sweet as cherry wine, pour me some more.”
My sarcasm drove the guard into a deeper rage. The louder I sang, the harder he hit. I would never have
guessed there could be so much anger piled up inside one man.
“That’s enough, Baybars!” I heard the other guard yell in panic. “Stop it, man!”
As suddenly as it had started, the lashing stopped. I wanted to have the last word, say something
powerful and blunt, but the blood in my mouth muffled my voice. My stomach churned, and before I knew
it, I vomited.
“You are a wreck,” Baybars reprimanded. “You have only yourself to blame for what I did to you.”
They turned their backs on me and strode off into the night.
I don’t know how long I lay there. It could have been no more than a few minutes or the whole night.
Time lost its weight, and so did everything else. The moon hid behind the clouds, leaving me not only
without its light but also without a sense of who I was. Soon I was floating in limbo between life and
death and not caring where I would end up. Then the numbness started to wear off, and every bruise,
every welt, every cut on my body ached madly, washing me with wave after wave of pain. My head was
wobbly, my limbs sore. In that state I moaned like a wounded animal.
I must have blacked out. When I opened my eyes, my salwar was drenched in urine and every limb of
my body ached dreadfully. I was praying to God either to numb me or to provide me with drink when I
heard footsteps approaching. My heart skipped a beat. It could be a street urchin or a robber, even a
murderer. But then I thought, what did I have to fear? I had reached a point where nothing the night could
bring was scary anymore.
Out of the shadows walked a tall, slender dervish with no hair. He knelt down beside me and helped
me sit up. He introduced himself as Shams of Tabriz and asked my name.
“Suleiman the drunk of Konya at your service,” I said as I plucked a loose tooth from my mouth. “Nice
to meet you.”
“You are bleeding,” Shams murmured as he started to wipe the blood off my face. “Not only on the
outside, but inside as well.”
Upon saying that, he took out a silver flask from the pocket of his robe. “Apply this ointment to your
wounds,” he said. “A good man in Baghdad gave it to me, but you need it more than I do. However, you
should know that the wound inside you is deeper, and that is the one you should worry about. This will
remind you that you bear God within you.”
“Thank you,” I heard myself stutter, touched by his kindness. “That security guard … he whipped me.
He said I deserved it.”
As soon as I uttered those words, I was struck by the childish whining in my voice and my need for
comfort and compassion.
Shams of Tabriz shook his head. “They had no right to do that. Every individual is self-sufficient in his
search for the divine. There is a rule regarding this: We were all created in His image, and yet we were
each created different and unique. No two people are alike. No two hearts beat to the same rhythm. If
God had wanted everyone to be the same, He would have made it so. Therefore, disrespecting
differences and imposing your thoughts on others is tantamount to disrespecting God’s holy scheme.”
“That sounds good,” I said, amazing myself by the ease in my voice. “But don’t you Sufis ever doubt
anything about Him?”
Shams of Tabriz smiled a tired smile. “We do, and doubts are good. It means you are alive and
searching.”
He spoke in a lilting tone, exactly as if he were reciting from a book.
“Besides, one does not become a believer overnight. He thinks he is a believer; then something
happens in his life and he becomes an unbeliever; after that, he becomes a believer again, and then an
unbeliever again, and so on. Until we reach a certain stage, we constantly waver. This is the only way
forward. At each new step, we come closer to the Truth.”
“If Hristos heard you talk like this, he would tell you to watch your tongue,” I said. “He says not every
word is fit for every ear.”
“Well, he’s got a point.” Shams of Tabriz let out a brief laugh as he jumped to his feet. “Come on, let
me take you home. We need to tend to your wounds and make sure you get some sleep.”
He helped me get on my feet, but I could hardly walk. Without hesitation the dervish lifted me as though
I weighed nothing and took me on his back.
“I warn you, I stink,” I mumbled in shame.
“That’s all right, Suleiman, don’t worry.”
In this way, never minding the blood, urine, or stench, the dervish carried me along the narrow streets
of Konya. We passed by houses and shacks plunged in deep slumber. Dogs barked at us, loudly and
ferociously, from behind the garden walls, informing everyone of our presence.
“I have always been curious about the mention of wine in Sufi poetry,” I said. “Is it real or
metaphorical wine that the Sufis praise?”
“What difference does it make, my friend?” Shams of Tabriz asked before he dropped me off in front of
my house. “There is a rule that explains this: When a true lover of God goes into a tavern, the tavern
becomes his chamber of prayer, but when a wine bibber goes into the same chamber, it becomes his
tavern. In everything we do, it is our hearts that make the difference, not our outer appearances. Sufis
do not judge other people on how they look or who they are. When a Sufi stares at someone, he keeps
both eyes closed and instead opens a third eye—the eye that sees the inner realm.”
Alone in my house after this long and exhausting night, I pondered what had transpired. As miserable as
I felt, somewhere deep inside me there was a blissful tranquillity. For a fleeting moment, I caught a
glimpse of it and yearned to remain there forever. At that moment I knew there was a God after all, and
He loved me.
Though I was sore, sore all over, strangely enough I was not hurting anymore.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, JUNE 3, 2008
Beach Boys tunes streaming through their open windows, university students drove past, their faces
sporting early-summer tans. Ella watched, numb to their happiness, as her mind reverted to the events of
the past few days. First she had found Spirit dead in the kitchen, and although she’d told herself many
times to be ready for this moment, she was seized by not only a profound grief but also a sense of
vulnerability and loneliness, as if losing her dog had the effect of throwing her out into the world all by
herself. Then she found out that Orly was suffering from bulimia and that almost everyone in her class
knew about it. This brought a wave of guilt to Ella, leading her to have doubts about her relationship with
her younger daughter and to question her record as a mother. Guilt was not a new element in Ella’s
repertoire of feelings, but this loss of confidence in her mothering was.
During this time Ella started exchanging multiple e-mails with Aziz Z. Zahara every day. Two, three,
sometimes up to five. She wrote to him about everything, and, to her surprise, he was always prompt to
respond. How he could find the time or even an Internet connection to check his e-mails while traveling in
remote places was beyond Ella. But it didn’t take her long to become addicted to his words. Soon she
was checking her e-mail at every opportunity—first thing in the morning and then again after breakfast,
when she came back from her morning walk and while she was making lunch, before she went out to run
errands and even during them, by stopping at Internet cafés. While she was watching her favorite TV
shows, chopping tomatoes at the Fusion Cooking Club, talking on the phone with her friends, or listening
to her twins rant about school and homework, she kept her laptop on and her mailbox open. When there
were no new messages from Aziz, she reread the old ones. And every time she received a new message
from him, she couldn’t help breaking into a smile, half gleeful, half embarrassed by what was taking
place. For something was taking place.
Soon exchanging e-mails with Aziz made Ella feel that she was somehow breaking away from her staid
and tranquil life. From a woman with lots of dull grays and browns on her life’s canvas, she was turning
into a woman with a secret color—a bright, tantalizing red. And she loved it.
Aziz was no man for small pleasantries. To him, people who had not made their heart their primary
guide to life, who could not open up to love and follow its path the way a sunflower follows the sun, were
not really alive. (Ella wondered if this might put her on his list of inanimate objects.) Aziz didn’t write
about the weather or the latest movie he had seen. He wrote about other things, deeper things, like life and
death, and above all love. Ella was not used to expressing her feelings on such issues, especially to a
stranger, but perhaps it took a stranger to make a woman like her speak her mind.
If there was a trace of flirtation in their exchange, Ella thought, it was an innocent one that might do
them both good. They could flirt with each other, positioning themselves in distant corners within the
infinite maze of cyberspace. Thanks to this exchange, she hoped to regain a portion of the sense of worth
she had lost during her marriage. Aziz was that rare type of man a woman could love without losing her
self-respect. And perhaps he, too, could find something pleasing in being the center of attention of a
middle-aged American woman. Cyberspace both magnified and mellowed offline behaviors, providing an
opportunity to flirt without guilt (which she didn’t want because she already had too much) and an
adventure without risks (which she did want because she never had any). It was like nibbling on
forbidden fruit without having to worry about the extra calories—there were no consequences.
So maybe it was blasphemy for a married woman with children to write intimate e-mails to a stranger,
but given the platonic nature of their relationship, Ella deduced, it was sweet blasphemy.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, JUNE 5, 2008
Beloved Aziz,
In one of your earlier e-mails, you said the idea that we could control the course of our lives through rational choices was as absurd as a
fish trying to control the ocean in which it swam. I thought about your next sentence a lot: “The idea of a Knowing Self has generated
not only false expectations but also disappointments in places where life does not match our expectations.”
And now it’s time for me to confess: I’m a bit of a control freak myself. At least that’s what people who know me best will tell you.
Until recently I was a very strict mom. I had a lot of rules (and believe me, they’re not as nice as your Sufi rules!), and there was no
bargaining with me. Once my eldest daughter accused me of adopting the strategy of a guerrilla. She said I dug into their lives and from
my trench I tried to capture every errant thought or desire that they might have!
Remember the song “Que Será, Será”? Well, I guess it has never been my song. “What will be, will be” has never sat right with me;
I just can’t go with the flow. I know you’re a religious person, but I’m not. Though as a family we celebrate the Sabbath every so often,
personally I don’t even remember the last time I prayed. (Oops, I do now. In my kitchen just two days ago, but that doesn’t count,
because it was more like complaining to a higher Self.)
There was a time back in college when I got hooked on Eastern spirituality and did some reading on Buddhism and Taoism. I had
even made plans with an eccentric girlfriend to spend a month at an ashram in India, but that phase of my life didn’t last long. As
inviting as the mystic teachings were, I thought they were too compliant and inapplicable to modern life. Since then I haven’t changed
my mind.
I hope my aversion to religion won’t offend you. Please see it as a confession long overdue from someone who cares about you.
Warmly,
Ella
Dear guerrilla Ella,
Your e-mail found me as I was getting ready to leave Amsterdam for Malawi. I have been assigned to take pictures of the people in a
village where AIDS is rampant and most children are orphans.
Now, if everything goes well, I’ll be back in four days. Can I hope so? Yes. Can I control it? No! All I can do is take my laptop with
me, try to find a good Internet connection, and hope that I will live another day. The rest is not in my hands. And this is what the Sufis
call the fifth element—the void. The inexplicable and uncontrollable divine element that we as human beings cannot comprehend and
yet should always be aware of. I don’t believe in “inaction” if by that you mean doing nothing at all and showing no deep interest in life.
But I do believe in respecting the fifth element.
I believe we each make a covenant with God. I know that I did. When I became a Sufi, I promised God to do my part to the best of
my ability and leave the rest to Him and Him only. I accepted the fact that there are things beyond my limits. I can see only some parts,
like floating fragments from a movie, but the bigger scheme is beyond my comprehension.
Now, you think I am a religious man. But I am not.
I am spiritual, which is different. Religiosity and spirituality are not the same thing, and I believe that the gap between the two has
never been greater than it is today. When I look at the world, I see a deepening quandary. On the one hand, we believe in the freedom
and power of the individual regardless of God, government, or society. In many ways human beings are becoming more self-centered
and the world is becoming more materialistic. On the other hand, humanity as a whole is becoming more spiritual. After relying on
reason for so long, we seem to have reached a point where we acknowledge the limits of the mind.
Today, just as in medieval times, there is an explosion of interest in spirituality. More and more people in the West are trying to carve
out a space for spirituality in the midst of their busy lives. But though they intend well, their methods are often inadequate. Spirituality is
not yet another dressing for the same old dish. It is not something we can add to our life without making major changes there.
I know you like to cook. Did you know that Shams says the world is a huge cauldron and something big is cooking in it? We don’t
know what yet. Everything we do, feel, or think is an ingredient in that mixture. We need to ask ourselves what we are adding to the
cauldron. Are we adding resentments, animosities, anger, and violence? Or are we adding love and harmony?
How about you, dear Ella? What ingredients do you think you are putting in the collective stew of humanity? Whenever I think about
you, the ingredient I add is a big smile.
With love,
Aziz
PART THREE
Wind
THE THINGS THAT SHIFT, EVOLVE, AND CHALLENGE
The Zealot
KONYA, OCTOBER 19, 1244
Below my open window, dogs were barking and growling. I propped myself up in bed, suspecting they
must have noticed a robber trying to break in to a house, or some dirty drunk passing by. Decent people
cannot sleep in peace anymore. There is debauchery and lechery everywhere. It wasn’t always like this.
This town was a safer place until a few years ago. Moral corruption is no different from a ghastly disease
that comes without warning and spreads fast, infecting the rich and the poor, the old and the young alike.
Such is the state of our town today. If it weren’t for my position at the madrassa, I would hardly leave my
house.
Thank God there are people who put the interests of the community before their own and work day and
night to enforce order. People like my young nephew, Baybars. My wife and I are proud of him. It is
comforting to know that at this late hour, when villains, criminals, and drunks go on a rampage, Baybars
and his fellow security guards patrol the town to protect us.
Upon my brother’s early death, I became the primary guardian for Baybars. Young, adamant, he started
working as a security guard six months ago. Gossipmongers claimed that it was thanks to my position as a
madrassa teacher that he was able to get the job. Nonsense! Baybars is strong and brave enough to qualify
for the job. He would also have made an excellent soldier. He wanted to go to Jerusalem to fight against
the Crusaders, but my wife and I thought it was time for him to settle down and start a family.
“We need you here, son,” I said. “There is so much to fight against here, too.”
Indeed there was. Just this morning I told my wife we were living in difficult times. It is no coincidence
that every day we hear of a new tragedy. If the Mongols have been this victorious, if the Christians could
succeed in furthering their cause, if town after town, village after village is sacked by the enemies of
Islam, it is because of the people who are Muslims in name only. When people lose hold of the rope of
God, they are bound to go astray. The Mongols were sent as a punishment for our sins. If not the Mongols,
it would have been an earthquake, a famine, or a flood. How many more calamities do we have to
experience for the sinners in this town to get the message and repent their ways? Next I fear stones will
rain down from above. One day soon we might all be wiped out, walking in the footsteps of the residents
of Sodom and Gomorrah.
And these Sufis, they are such a bad influence. How dare they call themselves Muslims when they say
things no Muslim should even think of? It boils my blood to hear them utter the name of the Prophet, peace
be upon him, to promote their silly views. They claim that following a war campaign, the Prophet
Muhammad had announced that his people were henceforth abandoning the small jihad for the greater
jihad—the struggle against one’s own ego. Sufis argue that ever since then the ego is the only adversary a
Muslim should be warring against. Sounds nice, but how is that going to help to fight the enemies of
Islam? I wonder.
The Sufis go as far as claiming that the sharia is merely a stage on the way. What stage, I say, what are
they speaking of? As if that weren’t alarming enough, they argue that an enlightened person cannot be
bound by the rules of early stages. And since they like to think of themselves as having already reached a
supreme level, they use this as a poor excuse to disregard the rules of the sharia. Drinking, dancing,
music, poetry, and painting seem more vital to them than religious duties. They keep preaching that since
there is no hierarchy in Islam, everyone is entitled to his own personal quest for God. It all sounds
inoffensive and harmless, but after one wades through the boring verbosity, one discovers that there is a
sinister side to their message: that there is no need to pay attention to religious authorities!
As far as the Sufis are concerned, the holy Qur’an is replete with obscure symbols and layered
allusions, each of which ought to be interpreted in a mystic way. So they examine how every word
vibrates to a number, study the hidden meaning of numbers, and look out for veiled references in the text,
doing everything in their power to avoid reading God’s message, plain and clear.
Some Sufis even say that human beings are the Speaking Qur’an. If this isn’t sheer blasphemy, I don’t
know what is. Then there are the wandering dervishes, another troubled category of misfits. Qalandaris,
Haydaris, Camiis—they’re known under all sorts of names. I’d say they are the worst. What good could
come out of a man who cannot settle down? If a man has no sense of belonging, he can drift in every
direction, like a dry leaf in the wind. The perfect victim for Sheitan.
Philosophers are no better than the Sufis. They ruminate and ruminate as if their limited minds could
grasp the incomprehensibility of the universe! There is a story that is indicative of the conspiracy between
the philosophers and the Sufis.
A philosopher met a dervish one day, and they instantly hit it off. The two talked for days on end,
completing each other’s sentences.
Finally, when they parted company, the philosopher reported of the conversation, “All that I know,
he sees.”
Next the Sufi gave his account: “All that I see, he knows.”
So the Sufi thinks he sees, and the philosopher thinks he knows. In my opinion they see nothing and
know nothing. Don’t they realize that as simple, limited, and ultimately mortal human beings, we are not
expected to know more than we should? The most a human being is capable of attaining is a mere
smattering of information about the Almighty. That’s all. Our task is not to interpret God’s teachings but to
obey them.
When Baybars comes home, we will talk about these matters. It has become a habit, our small ritual.
Every night after his shift, he eats the soup and flatbread that my wife serves him, and we engage in
conversation about the state of things. It pleases me to see what a good appetite he has. He needs to be
strong. A young, principled guy like him has much work to do in this ungodly town.
Shams
KONYA, OCTOBER 30, 1244
Before I met Rumi, just one night prior, I sat on my balcony at the Inn of Sugar Vendors. My heart rejoiced
at the magnificence of the universe God had created in His image, so that everywhere we turned, we
could both seek and find Him. And yet human beings rarely did that.
I recalled the individuals I had met—the beggar, the prostitute, and the drunk. Ordinary people who
suffered from a common malady: separation from the One. These were the kind of people that the scholars
failed to see while sitting in their ivory towers. I wondered if Rumi was any different. If not, I made a
note to myself that I should be a conduit between him and the underbelly of society.
The town had finally gone to sleep. It was that time of night when even the nocturnal animals are
reluctant to disturb the reigning peace. It always made me both immensely sad and elated to listen to a
town sleep, wondering what sorts of stories were being lived behind closed doors, what sorts of stories I
could have lived had I chosen another path. But I hadn’t made any choice. If anything, the path had chosen
me.
I remembered a tale. A wandering dervish arrived in a town where the natives didn’t trust strangers.
“Go away!” they shouted at him. “No one knows you here!”
The dervish calmly responded, “Yes, but I know myself, and believe me, it would have been much
worse if it were the other way round.”
As long as I knew myself, I would be all right. Whosoever knows himself, knows the One.
The moon showered me with its warm glow. A light rain, as delicate as a silk scarf, began to fall on the
town. I thanked God for this blessed moment and left myself in His hands. The fragility and brevity of life
struck me once again, and I recalled another rule: Life is a temporary loan, and this world is nothing but
a sketchy imitation of Reality. Only children would mistake a toy for the real thing. And yet human
beings either become infatuated with the toy or disrespectfully break it and throw it aside. In this life
stay away from all kinds of extremities, for they will destroy your inner balance.
Sufis do not go to extremes. A Sufi always remains mild and moderate.
Tomorrow morning I will go to the big mosque and listen to Rumi. He can be as great a preacher as
everyone says, but in the end the breadth and scope of every speaker are determined by those of his
audience. Rumi’s words might be like a wild garden, full of teasels, herbs, spruces, and shrubs, but it is
always up to the visitor to pick his fancy. While pretty flowers are instantly plucked, few people pay
attention to plants with thorns and prickles. But the truth is, great medicines are often made from these.
Isn’t it the same with the garden of love? How can love be worthy of its name if one selects solely the
pretty things and leaves out the hardships? It is easy to enjoy the good and dislike the bad. Anybody can
do that. The real challenge is to love the good and the bad together, not because you need to take the rough
with the smooth but because you need to go beyond such descriptions and accept love in its entirety.
There is only one more day before I meet my companion. I cannot sleep.
Oh, Rumi! The king of the realm of words and meanings!
Will you know me when you see me?
See me!
Rumi
KONYA, OCTOBER 31, 1244
Blessed is this day, for I have met Shams of Tabriz. On this last day of October, the air has a new chill
and the winds blow stronger, announcing the departure of autumn.
This afternoon the mosque was packed, as usual. While preaching to large crowds, I always take care
to neither forget nor remember my audience. And there is only one way of doing this: to imagine the
crowd as one single person. Hundreds of people listen to me every week, but I always talk to one person
alone—the one who hears my words echo in his heart and who knows me like no other.
When I walked out of the mosque afterward, I found my horse readied for me. The animal’s mane had
been braided with strands of gold and tiny silver bells. I enjoyed listening to the tinkling of the bells at
every step, but with so many people blocking the way it was impossible to proceed very fast. In a
measured pace, we passed by shabby stores and houses with thatched roofs. The calls of the petitioners
mingled with the cries of children and the shouts of beggars eager to earn a few coins. Most of these
people wanted me to pray for them; some simply wished to walk close to me. But there were others who
had come with bigger expectations, asking me to heal them of a terminal illness or an evil spell. These
were the ones who worried me. How could they not see that, neither a prophet nor a sage, I was incapable
of performing miracles?
As we turned a corner and approached the Inn of Sugar Vendors, I noticed a wandering dervish push
his way through the crowd, strutting directly toward me and regarding me with piercing eyes. His
movements were deft and focused, and he exuded an aura of self-sufficient competence. He had no hair.
No beard. No eyebrows. And though his face was as open as a man’s face could ever be, his expression
was inscrutable.
But it wasn’t his appearance that intrigued me. Over the years I had seen wandering dervishes of all
sorts pass through Konya in their quest for God. With striking tattoos, multiple earrings and nose rings,
most of these people enjoyed having “unruly” written all over them. They either wore their hair very long
or shaved it off completely. Some Qalandaris even had their tongues and nipples pierced. So when I saw
the dervish for the first time, it wasn’t his outer shell that startled me. It was, I dare to say, his gaze.
His black eyes blazing at me sharper than daggers, he stood in the middle of the street and raised his
arms high and wide, as if he wanted to halt not only the procession but also the flow of time. I felt a jolt
run through my body, like a sudden intuition. My horse got nervous and started to snort loudly, jerking its
head up and down. I tried to calm it, but it got so skittish that I, too, felt nervous.
Before my eyes the dervish approached my horse, which was shying and dancing about, and whispered
something inaudible to it. The animal started to breathe heavily, but when the dervish waved his hand in a
final gesture, it instantly quieted down. A wave of excitement rippled through the crowd, and I heard
someone mutter, “That’s black magic!”
Oblivious to his surroundings, the dervish eyed me curiously. “O great scholar of East and West, I have
heard so much about you. I came here today to ask you a question, if I may?”
“Go ahead,” I said under my breath.
“Well, you need to get down from your horse first and be on the same level with me.”
I was so stunned to hear this that I couldn’t speak for a moment. The people around me seemed equally
taken aback. No one had ever dared to address me like this before.
I felt my face burn and my stomach turn with irritation, but I managed to control my ego and dismounted
my horse. The dervish had already turned his back and was walking away.
“Hey, wait, please!” I yelled as I caught up with him. “I want to hear your question.”
He stopped and turned around, smiling at me for the first time. “All right, do tell me, please, which of
the two is greater, do you think: the Prophet Muhammad or the Sufi Bistami?”
“What kind of a question is that?” I said. “How can you compare our venerated Prophet, may peace be
upon him, the last in the line of prophets, with an infamous mystic?”
A curious crowd had gathered around us, but the dervish didn’t seem to mind the audience. Still
studying my face carefully, he insisted, “Please think about it. Didn’t the Prophet say, ‘Forgive me, God, I
couldn’t know Thee as I should have,’ while Bistami pronounced, ‘Glory be to me, I carry God inside my
cloak’? If one man feels so small in relation to God while another man claims to carry God inside, which
of the two is greater?”
My heart pulsed in my throat. The question didn’t seem so absurd anymore. In fact, it felt as if a veil
had been lifted and what awaited me underneath was an intriguing puzzle. A furtive smile, like a passing
breeze, crossed the lips of the dervish. Now I knew he was not some crazy lunatic. He was a man with a
question—a question I hadn’t thought about before.
“I see what you are trying to say,” I began, not wanting him to hear so much as a quaver in my voice.
“I’ll compare the two statements and tell you why, even though Bistami’s statement sounds higher, it is in
fact the other way round.”
“I am all ears,” the dervish said.
“You see, God’s love is an endless ocean, and human beings strive to get as much water as they can out
of it. But at the end of the day, how much water we each get depends on the size of our cups. Some people
have barrels, some buckets, while some others have only got bowls.”
As I spoke, I watched the dervish’s expression change from subtle scorn to open acknowledgment and
from there into the soft smile of someone recognizing his own thoughts in the words of another.
“Bistami’s container was relatively small, and his thirst was quenched after a mouthful. He was happy
in the stage he was at. It was wonderful that he recognized the divine in himself, but even then there still
remains a distinction between God and Self. Unity is not achieved. As for the Prophet, he was the Elect of
God and had a much bigger cup to fill. This is why God asked him in the Qur’an, Have we not opened up
your heart? His heart thus widened, his cup immense, it was thirst upon thirst for him. No wonder he
said, ‘We do not know You as we should,’ although he certainly knew Him as no other did.”
Breaking into a good-natured grin, the dervish nodded and thanked me. He then placed his hand on his
heart in a gesture of gratitude and stayed like that for a few seconds. When our eyes met again, I noticed
that a trace of gentleness had crept into his gaze.
I stared past the dervish into the pearl gray landscape that was typical of our town at this time of the
year. A few dry leaves skittered around our feet. The dervish looked at me with renewed interest, and in
the dying light of the setting sun, for a split second, I could swear that I saw an amber aura around him.
He bowed to me respectfully. And I bowed to him. I don’t know how long we stood like that, the sky
hanging violet above our heads. After a while the crowd around us began to stir nervously, having
watched our exchange with an astonishment that verged on disapproval. They had never seen me bow to
anyone before, and the fact that I had done so for a simple wandering Sufi had come as a shock to some
people, including my closest disciples.
The dervish must have sensed the censure in the air.
“I’d better go now and leave you to your admirers,” he said, his voice dwindling to a velvety timbre,
almost a whisper.
“Wait,” I objected. “Don’t go, please. Stay!”
I glimpsed a trace of thoughtfulness in his face, a wistful pucker of the lips, as if he wanted to say more
but simply couldn’t or wouldn’t. And in that moment, in that pause, I heard the question he hadn’t asked
me.
And how about you, great preacher? Tell me, how big is your cup?
Then there was nothing else to say. We ran out of words. I took a step toward the dervish, getting so
close I could see the flecks of gold in his black eyes. Suddenly I was overcome with a strange feeling, as
if I had lived this moment before. Not once, but more than a dozen times. I started to remember bits and
pieces. A tall, slender man with a veil on his face, his fingers aflame. And then I knew. The dervish who
stood across from me was no other than the man I had been seeing in my dreams.
I knew that I had found my companion. But instead of feeling ecstatic with joy, as I always thought I
would be, I was seized by cold dread.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, JUNE 8, 2008
Beleaguered by questions and lacking answers, Ella found that there were many things that surprised her
about her correspondence with Aziz, particularly the fact that it was happening. The two of them were so
different in every respect that she wondered what they could possibly have in common to e-mail each
other about so frequently.
Aziz was like a jigsaw puzzle she aimed to complete piece by piece. With every new e-mail from him,
another piece of that puzzle fell into place. Ella had yet to see the entire picture, but by now she had
discovered a few things about the man she’d been corresponding with.
She had learned from his blog that Aziz was a professional photographer and an avid globe-trotter who
found navigating his way through the farthest corners of the world as natural and easy as taking a stroll
around the neighborhood park. A relentless nomad at heart, he had been everywhere, equally at home in
Siberia, Shanghai, Calcutta, and Casablanca. Traveling with only a backpack and a reed flute, he had
made friends in places Ella couldn’t even find on the map. Uncompromising border guards, the
impossibility of getting a visa from hostile governments, waterborne parasitic diseases, intestinal
disorders due to contaminated food, the danger of being mugged, clashes between government troops and
rebels—nothing could hold him back from traveling east and west, north and south.
Ella thought Aziz was a gushing waterfall. Where she feared to step, he surged full blast. Where she
hesitated and worried before acting, he acted first and worried later, if he ever worried at all. He had an
animated personality, too much idealism and passion for one body. He wore many hats and he wore them
well.
Ella saw herself as a liberal, opinionated Democrat, a nonpracticing Jew, and an aspiring vegetarian
who was determined to cut all sorts of meat from her meals one day. She separated issues into clear-cut
categories, organizing her world pretty much as she organized her house, neat and tidy. Her mind operated
with two mutually exclusive and equally lengthy lists: the things she liked versus the things she hated.
Though she was by no means an atheist and enjoyed performing a few rituals every now and then, Ella
believed that the major problem consuming the world today, just as in the past, was religion. With their
unparalleled arrogance and self-proclaimed belief in the supremacy of their ways, religious people got on
her nerves. Fanatics of all religions were bad and unbearable, but deep inside she thought that fanatics of
Islam were the worst.
Aziz, however, was a spiritual man who took matters of religion and faith seriously, stayed away from
all contemporary politics, and didn’t “hate” anything or anyone. A die-hard meat eater, he said he would
never refuse a plate of well-cooked shish kebab. He had converted to Islam from atheism in the mid1970s,
as he jokingly put it, “sometime after Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and before Cat Stevens.” Ever since
then he had shared bread with hundreds of mystics from every country and religion, and he declared them
“brothers and sisters along the path.”
A committed pacifist with strong humanitarian views, Aziz believed that all religious wars were in
essence a “linguistic problem.” Language, he said, did more to hide than reveal the Truth, and as a result
people constantly misunderstood and misjudged one another. In a world beset with mistranslations, there
was no use in being resolute about any topic, because it might as well be that even our strongest
convictions were caused by a simple misunderstanding. In general, one shouldn’t be too rigid about
anything because “to live meant to constantly shift colors.”
Aziz and Ella lived in different time zones. Literally and metaphorically. For her, time primarily meant
the future. She spent a considerable part of her days obsessing over plans for the next year, the next month,
the next day, or even the next minute. Even for things as trivial as shopping or replacing a broken chair,
Ella planned every detail in advance and went around with meticulous schedules and to-do lists in her
bag.
For Aziz, on the other hand, time centered on this very moment, and anything other than now was an
illusion. For the same reason, he believed that love had nothing to do with “plans for tomorrow” or
“memories of yesterday.” Love could only be here and now. One of his earlier e-mails to her had ended
with this note: “I am a Sufi, the child of the present moment.”
“What a bizarre thing to say,” Ella wrote him back, “to a woman who has always put too much thought
into the past and even more thought into the future but somehow never even touched the present moment.”
Aladdin
KONYA, DECEMBER 16, 1244
By the fates I wasn’t there when the dervish crossed my father’s path. I had gone deer hunting with several
friends and came back only the next day. By then my father’s encounter with Shams of Tabriz was the talk
of the town. Who was this dervish, people gossiped, and how come an erudite man like Rumi had taken
him seriously, to the point of bowing down to him?
Ever since I was a boy, I had watched people kneel in front of my father and had never imagined that it
could be any other way—that is, unless the other person was a king or a grand vizier. So I refused to
believe half the things I heard and didn’t let the gossip get under my skin, until I arrived home and Kerra,
my stepmother, who never lies and never exaggerates, confirmed the whole story. Yes, it was true, a
wandering dervish named Shams of Tabriz had challenged my father in public, and, what’s more, he was
now staying in our house.
Who was this stranger who had plummeted into our lives like a mysterious rock hurled from the sky?
Eager to see him with my own eyes, I asked Kerra, “So where is this man?”
“Be quiet,” Kerra whispered, a little nervously. “Your father and the dervish are in the library.”
We could hear the far hum of their voices, though it was impossible to make out what they were talking
about. I headed in that direction, but Kerra stopped me.
“I am afraid you will have to wait. They asked not to be disturbed.”
For the whole day, they didn’t come out of the library. Neither the next day nor the one following. What
could they possibly be talking about? What could someone like my father and a simple dervish have in
common?
A week passed, then another. Every morning Kerra prepared breakfast and left it on a tray in front of
their door. No matter what delicacies she prepared for them, they refused it all, content with only a slice
of bread in the morning and a glass of goat’s milk in the evening.
Perturbed, jittery, I was grabbed by an ill mood during this period. At various hours throughout the day,
I tried every hole and crack in the door to peep inside the library. Never minding what would happen if
they suddenly opened the door and found me eavesdropping there, I spent a lot of time hunched over,
trying to comprehend what they were talking about. But all I could hear was a low murmuring. I couldn’t
see much either. The room was shadowy, on account of the curtains being half closed. Without much to
see or hear, I allowed my mind busily to fill in the silences, fabricating the conversations they must be
having.
Once Kerra found me with my ear to the door, but she didn’t say anything. By this time she was more
desperate than I to learn what was going on. Women can’t help their curiosity; it is in their nature.
But it was a different story when my brother, Sultan Walad, caught me eavesdropping. He gave me a
burning look, his face turning sour.
“You have no right to spy on other people, especially not on your father,” he reprimanded.
I shrugged. “Honestly, brother, doesn’t it bother you that our father spends his time with a stranger? It
has been more than a month now. Father has brushed his family aside. Doesn’t that upset you?”
“Our father hasn’t brushed anyone aside,” my brother said. “He found a very good friend in Shams of
Tabriz. Instead of nagging and complaining like a toddler, you should be happy for our father. If you truly
love him, that is.”
That was the sort of thing only my brother could say. I was used to his peculiarities, so I did not take
umbrage at his scathing remarks. Always the nice boy, he was the darling of the family and the
neighborhood, my father’s favorite son.
Exactly forty days after my father and the dervish had cloistered themselves in the library, something
strange happened. I was crouched at the door again, eavesdropping on a thicker silence than usual, when
all of a sudden I heard the dervish speak up.
“It has been forty days since we retreated here. Every day we discussed another of The Forty Rules of
the Religion of Love. Now that we are done, I think we’d better go out. Your absence might have upset
your family.”
My father objected. “Don’t worry. My wife and sons are mature enough to understand that I might need
to spend some time away from them.”
“Well, I don’t know anything about your wife, but your two boys are as different as night and day,”
Shams responded. “The older one walks in your footsteps, but the younger one, I am afraid, marches to a
different drummer altogether. His heart is darkened with resentment and envy.”
My cheeks burned with anger. How could he say such awful things about me when we hadn’t even met?
“He thinks I don’t know him, but I do,” said the dervish a little while later. “While he was crouching
with his ear to the door, watching me through peepholes, I was watching him, too.”
I felt a sudden chill pass across me as every hair on my arms stood on end. Without giving it another
thought, I thrust the door open and stomped into the room. My father’s eyes widened with
incomprehension, but it didn’t take long for his shock to be replaced by anger.
“Aladdin, have you lost your mind? How dare you disturb us like this!” my father thundered.
Ignoring that question, I pointed at Shams and exclaimed, “Why don’t you first ask him how he dares to
talk about me like that?”
My father didn’t say a word. He just looked at me and drew in a deep breath, as if my presence were a
heavy burden on his shoulders.
“Please, Father, Kerra misses you. And so do your students. How can you turn your back on all your
loved ones for a lousy dervish?”
As soon as those words came out of my mouth, I regretted them, but it was too late. My father stared at
me with disappointment in his eyes. I had never seen him like this before.
“Aladdin, do yourself a favor. Get out of here—this minute,” my father said. “Go into a quiet place and
think about what you did. Do not talk to me until you have looked inside and recognized your mistake.”
“But, Father—”
“Just get out!” my father repeated, turning away from me.
With a sinking heart, I left the room, my palms wet, my knees trembling.
At that moment it dawned upon me that in some incomprehensible way our lives had changed, and
nothing would be the same again. Since the death of my mother eight years ago, this was the second time I
had felt abandoned by a parent.
Rumi
KONYA, DECEMBER 18, 1244
Batm Allah—the hidden face of God. Open my mind so I may see the Truth.
When Shams of Tabriz asked me that question about the Prophet Muhammad and the Sufi Bistami, I felt
as though we were the only two people left on the face of the earth. In front of us extended the seven
stages on the Path to Truth—seven maqamat every ego had to go through in order to attain Oneness.
The first stage is the Depraved Nafs, the most primitive and common state of being, when the soul is
entrapped in worldly pursuits. Most human beings are stuck there, struggling and suffering in the service
of their ego but always holding others responsible for their continuing unhappiness.
If and when a person becomes aware of the ego’s abased situation, by starting to work on himself, he
can move to the next stage, which in a way is the opposite of the previous one. Instead of blaming other
people all the time, the person who has reached this stage blames himself, sometimes to the point of selfeffacement.
Herein the ego becomes the Accusing Nafs and thus starts the journey toward inner
purification.
In the third stage, the person is more mature and the ego has evolved into the Inspired Nafs. It is only at
this level, and not anytime before, that one can experience the true meaning of the word “surrender” and
roam the Valley of Knowledge. Anyone who has made it this far will possess and display patience,
perseverance, wisdom, and humility. The world will feel new and full of inspiration. Nevertheless, many
of the people who reach the third level feel an urge to dwell here, losing the will or the courage to go
further. That is why, as beautiful and blessed as it is, the third stage is a trap for the one who aims higher.
Those who manage to go further reach the Valley of Wisdom and come to know the Serene Nafs. Here
the ego is not what it used to be, having altered into a high level of consciousness. Generosity, gratitude,
and an unwavering sense of contentment regardless of the hardships in life are the main characteristics
accompanying anyone who has arrived here. Beyond that lies the Valley of Unity. Those who are here
will be pleased with whatever situation God places them in. Mundane matters make no difference to them,
as they have achieved the Pleased Nafs.
In the next stage, the Pleasing Nafs, one becomes a lantern to humanity, radiating energy to everyone
who asks for it, teaching and illuminating like a true master. Sometimes such a person can also have
healing powers. Wherever he goes, he will make a big difference in other people’s lives. In everything he
does and aspires to do, his main goal is to serve God through serving others.
Finally, in the seventh stage, one attains the Purified Nafs and becomes Insan-i Kâmil, a perfect human
being. But nobody knows much about that state, and even if a few ever did, they wouldn’t speak of it.
The stages along the path are easy to summarize, difficult to experience. Adding to the obstacles that
appear along the way is the fact that there is no guarantee of continuous progress. The route from the first
to the last stage is by no means linear. There is always the danger of tumbling back into earlier stages,
sometimes even from a superior stage all the way down to the first one. Given the many traps along the
way, it is no wonder that in every century only a few people manage to reach the final stages.
So when Shams asked me that question, it wasn’t simply a comparison that he was after. He wanted me to
consider how far I was willing to go to efface my personality in order to be absorbed in God. There was
a second question hidden within his first question.
“How about you, great preacher?” he was asking me. “Of the seven stages, which stage are you at? And
do you think you have the heart to go further, till the very end? Tell me, how big is your cup?”
Kerra
KONYA, DECEMBER 18, 1244
Bemoaning my fate does me no good, I know. Yet I cannot help but wish that I were more knowledgeable
in religion, history, and philosophy and all the things Rumi and Shams must be talking about day and night.
There are times I want to rebel against having been created a woman. When you are born a girl, you are
taught how to cook and clean, wash dirty clothes, mend old socks, make butter and cheese, and feed
babies. Some women are also taught the art of love and making themselves attractive to men. But that’s
about it. Nobody gives women books to open their eyes.
In the first year of our marriage, I used to sneak into Rumi’s library at every opportunity. I would sit
there amid the books he loved so much, breathing in their dusty, moldy smells, wondering what mysteries
they hid inside. I knew how much Rumi adored his books, most of which had been handed down to him by
his late father, Baha’ al-Din. Of those, he was particularly fond of the Ma’arif. Many nights he would stay
awake until dawn reading it, although I suspected he knew the whole text by heart.
“Even if they paid me sacks of gold, I would never exchange my father’s books,” Rumi used to say.
“Each of these books is a priceless legacy from my ancestors. I took them from my father, and I will pass
them on to my sons.”
I learned the hard way just how much his books meant to him. Still in our first year of marriage, while I
was alone at home one day, it occurred to me to dust the library. I took out all the books from the shelves
and wiped their covers with a piece of velvet dabbed in rosewater. The locals believe that there is a kind
of juvenile djinn by the name of Kebikec who takes a twisted pleasure in destroying books. In order to
ward him off, it is the custom to write a note of warning inside each book: “Stand thou still, Kebikec,
stay away from this book!” How was I to know that it wasn’t only Kebikec who was supposed to stay
away from my husband’s books, but me as well?
That afternoon I dusted and cleaned every book in the library. As I kept working, I read from
Ghazzali’s Vivification of the Religious Sciences. Only when I heard a dry, distant voice behind me did I
realize how much time I had spent there.
“Kerra, what do you think you are doing here?”
It was Rumi, or someone who resembled him—the voice was harsher in tone, sterner in expression. In
all our eight years of marriage, that was the only time he’d spoken to me like that.
“I am cleaning,” I muttered, my voice weak. “I wanted to make it a surprise.”
Rumi responded, “I understand, but please do not touch my books again. In fact, I’d rather you did not
enter this room at all.”
After that day I stayed away from the library even when there was no one at home. I understood and
accepted that the world of books was not and never had been, nor ever would be, for me.
But when Shams of Tabriz came to our house, and he and my husband locked themselves in the library
for forty days, I felt an old resentment boil up inside me. A wound that I didn’t even know I had began to
bleed.
Kimya
KONYA, DECEMBER 20, 1244
Born to simple peasants in a valley by the Taurus Mountains, I was twelve the year Rumi adopted me. My
real parents were people who worked hard and aged before their time. We lived in a small house, and my
sister and I shared the same room with the ghosts of our dead siblings, five children all lost to simple
diseases. I was the only one in the house who could see the ghosts. It frightened my sister and made my
mother cry each time I mentioned what the little spirits were doing. I tried to explain, to no avail, that they
didn’t need to be frightened or worried, since none of my dead siblings looked scary or unhappy. This I
could never make my family understand.
One day a hermit passed by our village. Seeing how exhausted he was, my father invited him to spend
the night in our house. That evening, as we all sat by the fireplace and grilled goat cheese, the hermit told
us enchanting stories from faraway lands. While his voice droned on, I closed my eyes, traveling with him
to the deserts of Arabia, Bedouin tents in North Africa, and a sea of the bluest water, called the
Mediterranean. I found a seashell there on the beach, big and coiled, and put it in my pocket. I was
planning to walk the beach from one end to the other, but a sharp, repulsive smell stopped me midway.
When I opened my eyes, I found myself lying on the floor with everyone in the house around me,
looking worried. My mother was holding my head with one hand, and in her other hand was half an onion,
which she was forcing me to smell.
“She is back!” My sister clapped her hands with glee.
“Thank God!” My mother heaved a sigh. Then she turned to the hermit, explaining, “Ever since she was
a little girl, Kimya has been having fainting spells. It happens all the time.”
In the morning the hermit thanked us for our hospitality and bade us farewell.
Before he left, however, he said to my father, “Your daughter Kimya is an unusual child. She is very
gifted. It would be a pity if such gifts went unappreciated. You should send her to a school—”
“What would a girl need an education for?” my mother exclaimed. “Where did you hear such a thing?
She should stay by my side and weave carpets until she gets married. She’s a talented carpet weaver, you
know.”
But the hermit didn’t waver. “Well, she could make an even better scholar someday. Obviously, God
has not disfavored your daughter for being a girl and has bestowed many gifts upon her. Do you claim to
know better than God?” he asked. “If there are no schools available, send her to a scholar to receive the
education she deserves.”
My mother shook her head. But I could see that my father was of a different mind. Knowing his love for
education and knowledge, and his appreciation of my abilities, it didn’t surprise me to hear him ask, “We
don’t know of any scholars. Where am I going to find one?”
It was then that the hermit uttered the name that would change my life. He said, “I know a wonderful
scholar in Konya named Mawlana Jalal ad-Din Rumi. He might be glad to teach a girl like Kimya. Take
her to him. You won’t regret it.”
When the hermit was gone, my mother threw her arms up. “I am pregnant. Soon there will be another
mouth to feed in this house. I need help. A girl doesn’t need books. She needs to learn housework and
child care.”
I would have much preferred it if my mother had opposed my going away for other reasons. Had she
said she would miss me and couldn’t bear to give me to another family, even if for a temporary period, I
might have chosen to stay. But she said none of this. In any case, my father was convinced that the hermit
had a point, and within a few days so was I.
Shortly after, my father and I traveled to Konya. We waited for Rumi outside the madrassa where he
taught. When he walked out, I was too embarrassed to look up at him. Instead I looked at his hands. His
fingers were long, supple, and slender, more like an artisan’s than a scholar’s. My father shoved me
toward him.
“My daughter is very gifted. But I am a simple man, and so is my wife. We have been told you are the
most learned man in the region. Would you be willing to teach her?”
Even without looking at his face, I could sense that Rumi wasn’t surprised. He must have been used to
such requests. While he and my father engaged in a conversation, I walked toward the yard, where I saw
several boys but no girls. But on the way back, I was pleasantly surprised when I spotted a young woman
standing in a corner by herself, her round face still and white as if carved of marble. I waved at her. She
looked stunned, but after a brief hesitation she returned my wave.
“Hello, little girl, can you see me?” she asked.
When I nodded, the woman broke into a smile, clapping her hands. “That’s wonderful! No one else
can.”
We walked back toward my father and Rumi. I thought they would stop talking when they noticed her,
but she was right—they couldn’t see her.
“Come here, Kimya,” said Rumi. “Your father informs me you love to study. Tell me, what is it in
books that you like so much?”
I swallowed hard, unable to answer, paralyzed.
“Come on, sweetheart,” my father said, sounding disappointed.
I wanted to answer correctly, with a response that would make my father proud of me, except I didn’t
know what that was. In my anxiety the only sound that came out of my mouth was a desperate gasp.
My father and I would have gone back to our village empty-handed had the young woman not
intervened then. She held my hand and said, “Just tell the truth about yourself. It’s going to be fine, I
promise.”
Feeling better, I turned to Rumi and said, “I’d be honored to study the Qur’an with you, Master. I’m not
afraid of hard work.”
Rumi’s face brightened up. “That’s very good,” he said, yet then he paused as if he had just
remembered a nasty detail. “But you are a girl. Even if we study intensely and make good progress, you’ll
soon get married and have children. Years of education will be of no use.”
Now I didn’t know what to say and felt disheartened, almost guilty. My father, too, seemed troubled,
suddenly inspecting his shoes. Once again it was the young woman who came to my help. “Tell him his
wife always wanted to have a little girl and now she would be happy to see him educate one.”
Rumi laughed when I conveyed the message. “So I see you have visited my house and talked to my
wife. But let me assure you, Kerra doesn’t get involved in my teaching responsibilities.”
Slowly, forlornly, the young woman shook her head and whispered in my ear, “Tell him you were not
talking about Kerra, his second wife. You were talking about Gevher, the mother of his two sons.”
“I was talking about Gevher,” I said, pronouncing the name carefully. “The mother of your sons.”
Rumi’s face turned pale. “Gevher is dead, my child,” he said dryly. “But what do you know about my
late wife? Is this a tasteless joke?”
My father stepped in. “I’m sure she didn’t mean ill, Master. I can assure you Kimya is a serious child.
She never disrespects her elders.”
I realized I had to tell the truth. “Your late wife is here. She is holding my hand and encouraging me to
speak. She has dark brown almond eyes, pretty freckles, and she wears a long yellow robe.… ”
I paused as I noticed the young woman gesture to her slippers. “She wants me to tell you about her
slippers. They are made of bright orange silk and embroidered with small red flowers. They are very
pretty.”
“I brought her those slippers from Damascus,” Rumi said, his eyes filling with tears. “She loved them.”
Upon saying that, the scholar lapsed into silence, scratching his beard, his expression solemn and
distant. But when he spoke again, his voice was gentle and friendly, without a trace of gloom.
“Now I understand why everyone thinks your daughter is gifted,” Rumi said to my father. “Let’s go to
my house. We can talk about her future over dinner. I’m sure she’ll make an excellent student. Better than
many boys.”
Rumi then turned to me and asked, “Will you tell this to Gevher?”
“There is no need, Master. She has heard you,” I said. “She says she needs to go now. But she is
always watching you with love.”
Rumi smiled warmly. So did my father. There was now an easiness hanging in the air that hadn’t been
there before. At that moment, I knew my encounter with Rumi was going to have far-reaching
consequences. I had never been close to my mother, but as if to compensate for her lack, God was giving
me two fathers, my real father and my adopted father.
That is how I arrived in Rumi’s house eight years ago, a timid child hungry for knowledge. Kerra was
loving and compassionate, more so than my own mother, and Rumi’s sons were welcoming, especially his
elder son, who in time became a big brother to me.
In the end the hermit was right. As much as I missed my father and siblings, there hasn’t been a single
moment when I regretted coming to Konya and joining Rumi’s family. I spent many happy days under this
roof.
That is, until Shams of Tabriz came. His presence changed everything.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, JUNE 9, 2008
Being one who had never enjoyed solitude, Ella found she preferred it lately. Immersed in putting the final
touches to her editorial report on Sweet Blasphemy, she had asked Michelle for another week to turn it in.
She could have finished earlier, but she did not want to. The task gave her an excuse to retreat into her
mind and shun family duties and long-awaited marital confrontations. This week, for the first time, she
skipped the Fusion Cooking Club, unwilling to cook and chat with fifteen women who had similar lives at
a time when she wasn’t sure what to do with hers. She called in sick at the last minute.
Ella treated her communication with Aziz as a secret, of which suddenly she had way too many. Aziz
didn’t know she was not only reading his novel but also writing a report on it; the literary agency didn’t
know she was secretly flirting with the author of the book she was assigned to report on; and her children
and husband did not know anything regarding what the novel was about, the author, or the flirtation. In the
span of a few weeks, she had converted from a woman whose life was as transparent as the skin of a
newborn baby into a woman wallowing in secrets and lies. What surprised her even more than this change
was seeing that it did not disturb her in the least. It was as if she were waiting, confidently and patiently,
for something momentous to happen. This irrational expectation was part of the charm of her new mood,
for despite all the secrets, charming it was.
By this time e-mails weren’t enough. It was Ella who first called Aziz. Now, despite the five-hour time
difference, they talked on the phone almost every day. Aziz had told her that her voice was soft and
fragile. When she laughed, her laughter came in ripples, punctuated by short gasps, as if she weren’t sure
how much more to laugh. It was the laughter of a woman who had never learned not to pay too much
attention to the judgments of others.
“Just go with the flow,” he said. “Let go!”
But the flow around her was unsteady and disruptive as several things were happening in her house at
this time. Avi had started taking private classes in mathematics, and Orly was now seeing a counselor for
her eating disorder. This morning she had eaten half an omelet—her first substantial food in months—and
though she had instantly inquired how many calories there were in it, it was a small miracle that she
hadn’t felt guilty and punished herself by throwing up afterward. Meanwhile Jeannette had set off a
bombshell by announcing her breakup with Scott. She had offered no explanation other than the fact that
they both needed space. Ella wondered if “space” was a code for a new love, given that neither Jeannette
nor Scott had lost any time in finding someone new.
The speed with which human relations materialized and dissipated amazed Ella more than ever, and yet
she tried not to pass judgment on other people anymore. If there was one thing she had learned from her
correspondence with Aziz, it was that the more she remained calm and composed, the more her children
shared with her. Once she had stopped running after them, they had stopped running away from her.
Somehow things were working more smoothly and closer to her liking than in the times when she had
tirelessly tried to help and repair.
And to think she was doing nothing to achieve this result! Instead of seeing her role in the house as
some sort of glue, the invisible yet central bond that held everyone together, she had become a silent
spectator. She watched events unfold and days waft by, not necessarily coldly or indifferently but with
visible detachment. She had discovered that once she accepted that she didn’t have to stress herself about
things she had no control over, another self emerged from inside—one who was wiser, calmer, and far
more sensible.
“The fifth element,” she muttered to herself several times during the day. “Just accept the void!”
It didn’t take long for her husband to notice there was something strange about her, something so not
Ella. Was this why all of a sudden he wanted to spend more time with her? He came home earlier these
days, and Ella suspected he had not been seeing other women for a while.
“Honey, are you all right?” David asked repeatedly.
“I am right as rain,” she answered, smiling back each time. It was as if her withdrawal into a calm,
private space of her own stripped away the polite decorum behind which her marriage had slept
undisturbed for many years. Now that the pretenses between them were gone, she could see their defects
and mistakes in all their nakedness. She had stopped pretending. And she had a feeling David was about
to do the same.
Over breakfasts and dinners, they talked about the day’s events in composed, adult voices, as though
discussing the annual return on their stock investments. Then they remained silent, acknowledging the
blunt fact that they didn’t have much else to talk about. Not anymore.
Sometimes she caught her husband looking at her intently, waiting for her to say something, almost
anything. Ella sensed if she asked him about his affairs, he would gladly have come clean. But she wasn’t
sure she wanted to know.
In the past she used to feign ignorance in order not to rock the boat of her marriage. Now, however, she
stopped acting as if she didn’t know what he’d been doing when he was away. She made it clear that she
did know and that she was uninterested. It was precisely this new aloofness that scared her husband. Ella
could understand him, because deep inside it scared her, too.
A month ago if David had taken even a tiny step to improve their marriage, she would have felt
grateful. Any attempt on his part would have delighted her. Not anymore. Now she suspected that her life
wasn’t real enough. How had she arrived at this point? How had the fulfilled mother of three discovered
her own despondency? More important, if she was unhappy, as she once told Jeannette she was, why was
she not doing the things unhappy people did all the time? No crying on the bathroom floor, no sobbing into
the kitchen sink, no melancholic long walks away from the house, no throwing things at the walls …
nothing.
A strange calm had descended upon Ella. She felt more stable than she’d ever been, even as she was
swiftly gliding away from the life she’d known. In the morning she looked into the mirror long and hard to
see if there was a visible change in her face. Did she look younger? Prettier? Or perhaps more full of
life? She couldn’t see any difference. Nothing had changed, and yet nothing was the same anymore.
Kerra
KONYA, MAY 5, 1245
Branches that once sagged under the weight of snow are now blossoming outside our window, and still
Shams of Tabriz is with us. During this time I have watched my husband turn into a different man, every
day drifting a bit further from me and his family. In the beginning I thought they would soon get bored with
each other, but no such thing occurred. If anything, they have become more attached. When together, either
they are strangely silent or they talk in an incessant murmur interspersed with peals of laughter, making me
wonder why they never run out of words. After each conversation with Shams, Rumi walks around a
transformed man, detached and absorbed, as if intoxicated by a substance I can neither taste nor see.
The bond that unites them is a nest for two, where there is no room for a third person. They nod, smile,
chuckle, or frown in the same way and at the same time, exchanging long, meaningful glances between
words. Even their moods seem to depend on each other. Some days they are calmer than a lullaby, eating
nothing, saying nothing, whereas other days they whirl around with such euphoria that they both resemble
madmen. Either way, I cannot recognize my husband anymore. The man I have been married to for more
than eight years now, the man whose children I have raised as if they were my own and with whom I had a
baby, has turned into a stranger. The only time I feel close to him is when he is in deep sleep. Many nights
over the past weeks, I have lain awake listening to the rhythm of his breathing, feeling the soft whisper of
his breath on my skin and the comfort of his heart beating in my ear, just to remind myself that he is still
the man I married.
I keep telling myself that this is a temporary stage. Shams will leave someday. He is a wandering
dervish, after all. Rumi will stay here with me. He belongs to this town and to his students. I need do
nothing except wait. But patience doesn’t come easily, and it’s getting harder with each passing day.
When I feel too despondent, I try to recall the old days—especially the time when Rumi stood by me
despite all odds.
“Kerra is a Christian. Even if she converts to Islam, she’ll never be one of us,” people had gossiped
when they first got wind of our impending marriage. “A leading scholar of Islam should not marry a
woman outside his faith.”
But Rumi took no notice of them. Neither then nor later on. For that reason I will always be grateful to
him.
Anatolia is made up of a mixture of religions, peoples, and cuisines. If we can eat the same food, sing
the same sad songs, believe in the same superstitions, and dream the same dreams at night, why shouldn’t
we be able to live together? I have known Christian babies with Muslim names and Muslim babies fed by
Christian milk mothers. Ours is an ever-liquid world where everything flows and mixes. If there is a
frontier between Christianity and Islam, it has to be more flexible than scholars on both sides think it is.
Because I am the wife of a famous scholar, people expect me to think highly of scholars, but the truth is,
I don’t. Scholars know a lot, that’s for sure, but is too much knowledge any good when it comes to matters
of faith? They always speak such big words that it is hard to follow what they are saying. Muslim
scholars criticize Christianity for accepting the Trinity, and Christian scholars criticize Islam for seeing
the Qur’an as a perfect book. They make it sound as if the two religions are a world apart. But if you ask
me, when it comes to the basics, ordinary Christians and ordinary Muslims have more in common with
each other than with their own scholars.
They say that the hardest thing for a Muslim converting to Christianity is to accept the Trinity. And the
hardest thing for a Christian converting to Islam is said to be letting go of the Trinity. In the Qur’an, Jesus
says, Surely I am a servant of God; He has given me the Book and made me a prophet.
Yet for me the idea that Jesus was not a son of God but a servant of God wasn’t that hard to believe.
What I found much harder to do was to abandon Mary. I haven’t told this to anyone, not even to Rumi, but
sometimes I yearn to see Mary’s kind brown eyes. Her gaze always had a soothing effect on me.
The truth is, ever since Shams of Tabriz came to our house, I have been so distressed and confused that
I find myself longing for Mary more than ever. Like a fever running wild through my veins, my need to
pray to Mary comes back with a force I can hardly control. At times like these, guilt consumes me, as if I
am cheating on my new religion.
Nobody knows this. Not even my neighbor Safiya, who is my confidante in all other matters. She
wouldn’t understand. I wish I could share it with my husband, but I cannot see how. He has been so
detached; I am afraid of distancing him even more. Rumi used to be everything to me. Now he is a
stranger. I never knew it was possible to live with someone under the same roof, sleep in the same bed,
and still feel that he was not really there.
Shams of Tabriz
KONYA, JUNE 12, 1245
Befuddled believer! If every Ramadan one fasts in the name of God and every Eid one sacrifices a sheep
or a goat as an atonement for his sins, if all his life one strives to make the pilgrimage to Mecca and five
times a day kneels on a prayer rug but at the same time has no room for love in his heart, what is the use of
all this trouble? Faith is only a word if there is no love at its center, so flaccid and lifeless, vague and
hollow—not anything you could truly feel.
Do they think God resides in Mecca or Medina? Or in some local mosque somewhere? How can they
imagine that God could be confined to limited space when He openly says, Neither My heaven nor My
earth embraces Me, but the heart of My believing servant does embrace Me.
Pity the fool who thinks the boundaries of his mortal mind are the boundaries of God the Almighty. Pity
the ignorant who assume they can negotiate and settle debts with God. Do such people think God is a
grocer who attempts to weigh our virtues and our wrongdoings on two separate scales? Is He a clerk
meticulously writing down our sins in His accounting book so as to make us pay Him back someday? Is
this their notion of Oneness?
Neither a grocer nor a clerk, my God is a magnificent God. A living God! Why would I want a dead
God? Alive He is. His name is al-Hayy—the Ever-Living. Why would I wallow in endless fears and
anxieties, always restricted by prohibitions and limitations? Infinitely compassionate He is. The name is
al-Wadud. All-Praiseworthy He is. I praise Him with all my words and deeds, as naturally and
effortlessly as I breathe. The name is al-Hamid. How can I ever spread gossip and slander if I know deep
down in my heart that God hears and sees it all? His name is al-Basir. Beautiful beyond all dreams and
hopes.
Al-Jamal, al-Kayyum, al-Rahman, al-Rahim. Through famine and flood, dry and athirst, I will sing and
dance for Him till my knees buckle, my body collapses, and my heart stops pounding. I will smash my ego
to smithereens, until I am no more than a particle of nothingness, the wayfarer of pure emptiness, the dust
of the dust in His great architecture. Gratefully, joyously, and relentlessly, I commend His splendor and
generosity. I thank Him for all the things He has both given and denied me, for only He knows what is best
for me.
Recalling another rule on my list, I felt a fresh wave of happiness and hope. The human being has a
unique place among God’s creation. “I breathed into him of My Spirit,” God says. Each and every one
of us without exception is designed to be God’s delegate on earth. Ask yourself, just how often do you
behave like a delegate, if you ever do so? Remember, it falls upon each of us to discover the divine
spirit inside and live by it.
Instead of losing themselves in the Love of God and waging a war against their ego, religious zealots
fight other people, generating wave after wave of fear. Looking at the whole universe with fear-tinted
eyes, it is no wonder that they see a plethora of things to be afraid of. Wherever there is an earthquake,
drought, or any other calamity, they take it as a sign of Divine Wrath—as if God does not openly say, My
compassion outweighs My wrath. Always resentful of somebody for this or that, they seem to expect God
the Almighty to step in on their behalf and take their pitiful revenges. Their life is a state of uninterrupted
bitterness and hostility, a discontentment so vast it follows them wherever they go, like a black cloud,
darkening both their past and their future.
There is such a thing in faith as not being able to see the forest for the trees. The totality of religion is
far greater and deeper than the sum of its component parts. Individual rules need to be read in the light of
the whole. And the whole is concealed in the essence.
Instead of searching for the essence of the Qur’an and embracing it as a whole, however, the bigots
single out a specific verse or two, giving priority to the divine commands that they deem to be in tune with
their fearful minds. They keep reminding everyone that on the Day of Judgment all human beings will be
forced to walk the Bridge of Sirat, thinner than a hair, sharper than a razor. Unable to cross the bridge, the
sinful will tumble into the pits of hell underneath, where they will suffer forever. Those who have led a
virtuous life will make it to the other end of the bridge, where they will be rewarded with exotic fruits,
sweet waters, and virgins. This, in a nutshell, is their notion of afterlife. So great is their obsession with
horrors and rewards, flames and fruits, angels and demons, that in their itch to reach a future that will
justify who they are today they forget about God! Don’t they know one of the forty rules? Hell is in the
here and now. So is heaven. Quit worrying about hell or dreaming about heaven, as they are both
present inside this very moment. Every time we fall in love, we ascend to heaven. Every time we hate,
envy, or fight someone, we tumble straight into the fires of hell. This is what Rule Number Twenty-five
is about.
Is there a worse hell than the torment a man suffers when he knows deep down in his conscience that he
has done something wrong, awfully wrong? Ask that man. He will tell you what hell is. Is there a better
paradise than the bliss that descends upon a man at those rare moments in life when the bolts of the
universe fly open and he feels in possession of all the secrets of eternity and fully united with God? Ask
that man. He will tell you what heaven is.
Why worry so much about the aftermath, an imaginary future, when this very moment is the only time
we can truly and fully experience both the presence and the absence of God in our lives? Motivated by
neither the fear of punishment in hell nor the desire to be rewarded in heaven, Sufis love God simply
because they love Him, pure and easy, untainted and nonnegotiable.
Love is the reason. Love is the goal.
And when you love God so much, when you love each and every one of His creations because of Him
and thanks to Him, extraneous categories melt into thin air. From that point on, there can be no “I”
anymore. All you amount to is a zero so big it covers your whole being.
The other day Rumi and I were contemplating these issues when all of a sudden he closed his eyes and
uttered the following lines:
“Not Christian or Jew or Muslim, not Hindu, Buddhist, Sufi or zen. Not any religion or
cultural system. I am not of the East, nor of the West.…
My place is placeless, a trace of the traceless.”
Rumi thinks he can never be a poet. But there is a poet in him. And a fabulous one! Now that poet is being
revealed.
Yes, Rumi is right. He is neither of the East nor of the West. He belongs in the Kingdom of Love. He
belongs to the Beloved.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, JUNE 12, 2008
By now Ella had finished reading Sweet Blasphemy and was putting the final touches on her editorial
report. Although she was dying to discuss the details of his novel with Aziz, her sense of professionalism
stopped her. It wouldn’t be right. Not before she was done with the assignment. She hadn’t even told Aziz
that after reading his novel she had bought a copy of Rumi’s poems and was now reading at least a few
poems every night before going to sleep. She had so neatly separated her work on the novel from her
exchange with the author. But on the twelfth of June, something happened that blurred the line between the
two forever.
Up until that day, Ella had never seen a picture of Aziz. There being no photos of him on his Web site,
she had no idea what he looked like. In the beginning she had enjoyed the mystery of writing to a man with
no face. But over time her curiosity began to get the best of her, and the need to put a face to his messages
tugged at her. He had never asked for a picture of her, which she found odd, really odd.
So, out of the blue, she sent him a picture of herself. There she was, out on the porch with dear Spirit,
wearing a skimpy cerulean dress that slightly revealed her curves. She was smiling in the picture—a halfpleased,
half-troubled smile. Her fingers firmly grasped the dog’s collar, as if trying to derive some
strength from him. Above them the sky was a patchwork of grays and purples. It wasn’t one of her best
pictures, but there was something spiritual, almost otherworldly, in this one. Or so she hoped. Ella sent it
as an e-mail attachment and then simply waited. It was her way of asking Aziz to send her his photo.
He did.
When Ella saw the picture Aziz sent her, she thought it must have been taken somewhere in the Far
East, not that she had ever been there. In the picture, Aziz was surrounded by more than a dozen darkhaired
native children of every age. Dressed in a black shirt and black trousers, he had a lean build, a
sharp nose, high cheekbones, and long, dark, wavy hair falling to his shoulders. His eyes were two
emeralds brimming with energy and something else that Ella recognized as compassion. He wore a single
earring and a necklace with an intricate shape that Ella couldn’t make out. In the background was a silvery
lake surrounded by tall grass, and in one corner loomed the shadow of something or someone that was
outside the frame.
As she inspected the man in the picture, taking in every detail, Ella had a feeling she recognized him
from somewhere. As bizarre as it felt, she could swear she had seen him before.
And suddenly she knew.
Shams of Tabriz bore more than a passing resemblance to Aziz Z. Zahara. He looked exactly the way
Shams was described in the manuscript before he headed to Konya to meet Rumi. Ella wondered if Aziz
had deliberately based his character’s looks on himself. As a writer, he might have wanted to create his
central character in his own image, just as God had created human beings in His image.
As she considered this, another possibility arose. Could it be that the real Shams of Tabriz had looked
just as he was described in the book, in which case it could only mean that there was a surprising
resemblance between two men almost eight hundred years apart? Could it be that the resemblance was
beyond the control and perhaps even the knowledge of the author? The more thought Ella put into this
dilemma, the more strongly she suspected that Shams of Tabriz and Aziz Z. Zahara could be connected in
a way that went beyond a simple literary gimmick.
The discovery had two unexpected impacts on Ella. First, she felt the need to go back to Sweet
Blasphemy and read the novel again, with a different eye, not for the sake of the story this time but to find
the author hidden in its central character, to find the Aziz in Shams of Tabriz.
Second, she became more intrigued by Aziz’s personality. Who was he? What was his story? In an
earlier e-mail, he had told her he was Scottish, but then why did he have an Eastern name—Aziz? Was it
his real name? Or was it his Sufi name? And by the way, what did it mean to be a Sufi?
There was something else that occupied her mind: the very first, almost imperceptible signs of desire.
It had been such a long time since she’d last felt it that it took her a few extra seconds to recognize the
feeling. But it was there. Strong, prodding, and disobedient. She realized that she desired the man in the
picture and wondered what it would be like to kiss him.
The feeling was so unexpected and embarrassing that she quickly turned off her laptop, as though the
man in the picture could otherwise suck her in.
Baybars the Warrior
KONYA, JULY 10, 1245
“Baybars, my son, trust no one,” my uncle says, “because the world is getting more corrupt each day.” He
claims that the only time when things were different was during the Golden Age, when the Prophet
Muhammad, peace be upon him, was duly in charge. Since his death everything has been going downhill.
But if you ask me, anyplace where there are more than two people is bound to become a battleground.
Even at the time of the Prophet, people had their share of hostilities, didn’t they? War is the core of life.
The lion eats the deer, and vultures reduce to bare bones what remains of the carcass. Nature is cruel. On
land, in sea or air, for every creature without exception, there is only one way to survive: to be shrewder
and stronger than your worst enemy. To stay alive you need to fight. It’s as simple as that.
And fight we must. Even the most naïve can see there is no other way in this day and age. Things took a
nasty turn five years ago when a hundred Mongol diplomats sent out by Genghis Khan to negotiate for
peace were all slaughtered. After that, Genghis Khan turned into a fireball of fury, declaring war against
Islam. How and why the diplomats were killed, nobody could say. Some people suspected that it was
Genghis Khan himself who had his own diplomats killed, so that he could start this massive war campaign
in the first place. It could be true. One never knows. But I do know that in five years the Mongols
devastated the whole Khorasan area, causing destruction and death everywhere they galloped. And two
years ago they defeated the Seljuk forces at Kosedag, turning the sultan into a tribute-paying vassal. The
only reason the Mongols didn’t wipe us out is that it is more profitable for them to keep us under their
yoke.
Wars might be present since time immemorial, at least since Cain killed his brother Abel, but the
Mongol army is like nothing we have seen before. Specialized in more ways than one, they use a vast
array of weapons, each designed for a specific purpose. Every Mongol soldier is heavily armored, with a
mace, an ax, a saber, and a spear. On top of that, they have arrows that can penetrate armor, set whole
villages ablaze, poison their victims, or pierce the hardest bones in the human body. They even have
whistling arrows, which they use to send signals from one battalion to another. With such well-developed
warfare skills and no God to fear, the Mongols attack and annihilate every city, town, and village on their
way. Even ancient cities like Bukhara have been turned into heaps of rubble. And it is not only the
Mongols. We need to get Jerusalem back from the Crusaders, not to mention the pressure from the
Byzantines and the rivalry between Shiites and Sunnis. When surrounded by cold-blooded enemies on all
sides, how can we afford to be peaceful?
This is why people like Rumi get on my nerves. I don’t care how highly everyone thinks of him. For me
he is a coward who spreads nothing but cowardice. He might have been a good scholar in the past, but
nowadays he is clearly under the influence of that heretic Shams. At a time when the enemies of Islam are
looming large, what does Rumi preach? Peace! Passivity! Submission!
Brother, stand the pain. Escape the poison
Of your impulses. The sky will bow to your beauty
If you do.… That way a thorn expands to a rose.
A particular glows with the universal.
Rumi preaches submissiveness, turning Muslims into a flock of sheep, meek and timid. He says for every
prophet there is a community of followers and for every community there is an appointed time. Other than
“love,” his favorite words seem to be “patience,” “balance,” and “tolerance.” If it were up to him, we
would all just sit in our houses and wait to be slaughtered by our enemies or be stricken by some other
calamity. And I am sure he would then come and briefly examine the wreck, calling it baraqa. There are
people who have heard him say, “When school and mosque and minaret get torn down, then dervishes can
begin their community.” Now, what kind of talk is that?
And when you come to think of it, the only reason Rumi ended up in this city is that decades ago his
family left Afghanistan seeking refuge in Anatolia. Many other powerful and wealthy people at the time
had received an open invitation from the sultan of Seljuks, among them Rumi’s father. Thus sheltered and
privileged and always showered with attention and approval, Rumi’s family left the bedlam of
Afghanistan for the tranquil orchards of Konya. It’s easy to preach tolerance when you have a history like
that!
The other day I heard a story that Shams of Tabriz told a group of people in the bazaar. He said that
Ali, the Prophet’s successor and companion, was fighting with an infidel on a battlefield. Ali was about
to thrust his sword into the other man’s heart when all of a sudden the infidel raised his head and spit at
him. Ali immediately dropped his sword, took a deep breath, and walked away. The infidel was stunned.
He ran after Ali and asked him why he was letting him go.
“Because I’m very angry at you,” said Ali.
“Then why don’t you kill me?” the infidel asked. “I don’t understand.”
Ali explained, “When you spit in my face, I got very angry. My ego was provoked, yearning for
revenge. If I kill you now, I’ll be following my ego. And that would be a huge mistake.”
So Ali set the man free. The infidel was so touched that he became Ali’s friend and follower, and in
time he converted to Islam of his own free will.
This, apparently, is the kind of story Shams of Tabriz likes to tell. And what is his message? Let the
infidels spit in your face! I say, over my dead body! Infidel or not, nobody can spit in the face of Baybars
the Warrior.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, JUNE 13, 2008
Beloved Aziz,
You’re going to think I’m crazy, but there’s something I’ve been meaning to ask you: Are you Shams?
Or is it the other way round? Is Shams you?
Yours sincerely,
Ella
Dear Ella,
Shams is the person who was responsible for the transformation of Rumi from a local cleric to a world-famous poet and mystic.
Master Sameed used to say to me, “Even if there might be a Shams equivalent in some people, what matters is, where are the
Rumis to see it?”
Warm regards,
Aziz
Dear Aziz,
Who is Master Sameed?
Best,
Ella
Beloved Ella,
It’s a long story. Do you really want to know?
Warmly,
Aziz
Dear Aziz,
I have plenty of time.
Love,
Ella
Rumi
KONYA, AUGUST 2, 1245
Bountiful is your life, full and complete. Or so you think, until someone comes along and makes you
realize what you have been missing all this time. Like a mirror that reflects what is absent rather than
present, he shows you the void in your soul—the void you have resisted seeing. That person can be a
lover, a friend, or a spiritual master. Sometimes it can be a child to look after. What matters is to find the
soul that will complete yours. All the prophets have given the same advice: Find the one who will be your
mirror! For me that mirror is Shams of Tabriz. Until he came and forced me to look deep into the crannies
of my soul, I had not faced the fundamental truth about myself: that though successful and prosperous
outside, I was lonely and unfulfilled inside.
It’s as if for years on end you compile a personal dictionary. In it you give your definition of every
concept that matters to you, such as “truth,” “happiness,” or “beauty.” At every major turning point in life,
you refer to this dictionary, hardly ever feeling the need to question its premises. Then one day a stranger
comes and snatches your precious dictionary and throws it away.
“All your definitions need to be redefined,” he says. “It’s time for you to unlearn everything you know.”
And you, for some reason unbeknownst to your mind but obvious to your heart, instead of raising
objections or getting cross with him, gladly comply. This is what Shams has done to me. Our friendship
has taught me so much. But more than that, he has taught me to unlearn everything I knew.
When you love someone this much, you expect everyone around you to feel the same way, sharing your
joy and euphoria. And when that doesn’t happen, you feel surprised, then offended and betrayed.
How could I possibly make my family and friends see what I see? How could I describe the
indescribable? Shams is my Sea of Mercy and Grace. He is my Sun of Truth and Faith. I call him the King
of Kings of Spirit. He is my fountain of life and my tall cypress tree, majestic and evergreen. His
companionship is like the fourth reading of the Qur’an—a journey that can only be experienced from
within but never grasped from the outside.
Unfortunately, most people make their evaluations based on images and hearsay. To them Shams is an
eccentric dervish. They think he behaves bizarrely and speaks blasphemy, that he is utterly unpredictable
and unreliable. To me, however, he is the epitome of Love that moves the whole universe, at times
retreating into the background and holding every piece together, at times exploding in bursts. An encounter
of this kind happens once in a lifetime. Once in thirty-eight years.
Ever since Shams came into our lives, people have been asking me what it is in him that I find so
special. But there is no way I can answer them. At the end of the day, those who ask this question are the
ones who won’t understand it, and as for those who do understand, they don’t ask such things.
The quandary I find myself in reminds me of the story of Layla and Harun ar-Rashid, the famous
Abbasid emperor. Upon hearing that a Bedouin poet named Qays had fallen hopelessly in love with Layla
and lost his mind for her, and was therefore named Majnun—the madman—the emperor became very
curious about the woman who had caused such misery.
This Layla must be a very special creature, he thought. A woman far superior to all other
women.Perhaps she is an enchantress unequaled in beauty and charm.
Excited, intrigued, he played every trick in the book to find a way to see Layla with his own eyes.
Finally one day they brought Layla to the emperor’s palace. When she took off her veil, Harun arRashid
was disillusioned. Not that Layla was ugly, crippled, or old. But she wasn’t extraordinarily
attractive either. She was a human being with ordinary human needs and several defects, a simple woman,
like countless others.
The emperor did not hide his disappointment. “Are you the one Majnun has been crazy about? Why, you
look so ordinary. What is so special about you?”
Layla broke into a smile. “Yes, I am Layla. But you are not Majnun,” she answered. “You have to see
me with the eyes of Majnun. Otherwise you could never solve this mystery called love.”
How can I explain the same mystery to my family, friends, or students? How can I make them
understand that for them to grasp what is so special about Shams of Tabriz, they have to start looking at
him with the eyes of Majnun?
Is there a way to grasp what love means without becoming a lover first?
Love cannot be explained. It can only be experienced.
Love cannot be explained, yet it explains all.
Kimya
KONYA, AUGUST 17, 1245
Breathlessly I wait for a summons, but Rumi doesn’t have time to study with me anymore. As much as I
miss our lessons and feel neglected, I am not upset with him. Maybe it’s because I love Rumi too much to
get cross with him. Or maybe it’s because I can understand better than anyone else how he feels, for deep
inside I, too, am swept up by the bewildering current that is Shams of Tabriz.
Rumi’s eyes follow Shams the way a sunflower follows the sun. Their love for each other is so visible
and intense, and what they have is so rare, that one can’t help feeling despondent around them, seized by
the realization that a bond of such magnitude is missing in one’s own life. Not everyone in the house can
tolerate this, starting with Aladdin. So many times I’ve caught him looking daggers at Shams. Kerra, too,
is ill at ease, but she never says anything and I never ask. We are all sitting on a powder keg. Strangely,
Shams of Tabriz, the man who is responsible for all the tension, either is unaware of the situation or
simply doesn’t care.
Part of me is bitter at Shams for taking Rumi away from us. Another part of me, however, is dying to
get to know him better. I have been struggling with these mixed feelings for some time now, but today, I
am afraid, I might have given myself away.
Late in the afternoon, I took out the Qur’an hanging on the wall, determined to study it on my own. In the
past, Rumi and I had always followed the order in which the verses were handed down to us, but now that
there was nobody guiding me and our lives had been turned topsy-turvy, I saw no harm in reading without
an order. So I haphazardly opened a page and put my finger on the first verse that came up. It turned out to
be al-Nisa, the one verse in the whole book that has troubled me the most. With its unpromising teachings
on women, I found the Nisa hard to understand and harder to accept. As I stood there reading the verse
one more time, it occurred to me to ask for help. Rumi might be skipping our lessons, but there was no
reason I couldn’t ask him questions. So I grabbed my Qur’an and went to his room.
To my surprise, instead of Rumi I found Shams there, sitting by the window with a rosary in his hand,
the dying light of the setting sun caressing his face. He looked so handsome I had to avert my eyes.
“I’m sorry,” I said quickly. “I was looking for Mawlana. I’ll come later.”
“Why the rush? Stay,” Shams said. “You seem to have come here to ask something. Perhaps I could be
of help.”
I saw no reason not to share it with him. “Well, there is this verse in the Qur’an that I find a bit hard to
understand,” I said tentatively.
Shams murmured, as if talking to himself, “The Qur’an is like a shy bride. She’ll open her veil only if
she sees that the onlooker is soft and compassionate at heart.” Then he squared his shoulders and asked,
“Which verse is it?”
“Al-Nisa,” I said. “There are some parts in it where men are said to be superior to women. It even says
men can beat their wives.… ”
“Is that so?” Shams asked with such exaggerated interest that I couldn’t be sure whether he was serious
or teasing me. After a momentary silence, he broke into a soft smile and out of memory recited the verse.
“Men are the maintainers of women because Allah has made some of them to excel others and
because they spend out of their property; the good women are therefore obedient, guarding the unseen
as Allah has guarded; and (as to) those on whose part you fear desertion, admonish them, and leave
them alone in the sleeping-places and beat them; then if they obey you, do not seek a way against
them; surely Allah is High, Great.”
When he finished, Shams closed his eyes and recited the same verse, this time in a different translation.
“Men are the support of women as God gives some more means than others, and because they spend
of their wealth (to provide for them). So women who are virtuous are obedient to God and guard the
hidden as God has guarded it. As for women you feel are averse, talk to them suasively; then leave
them alone in bed (without molesting them) and go to bed with them (when they are willing). If they
open out to you, do not seek an excuse for blaming them. Surely God is sublime and great.
“Do you see any difference between the two?” Shams asked.
“Yes I do,” I said. “Their whole texture is different. The former sounds as if it gives consent to married
men to beat their wives, whereas the latter advises them to simply walk away. I think that is a big
difference. Why is that?”
“Why is that? Why is that?” Shams echoed several times, as if enjoying the question. “Tell me
something, Kimya. Have you ever gone swimming in a river?”
I nodded as a childhood memory returned to me. The cold, thirst-quenching streams of the Taurus
Mountains crossed my mind. Of the younger girl who had spent many happy afternoons in those streams
with her sister and her friends, there was now little left behind. I turned my face away as I didn’t want
Shams to see the tears in my eyes.
“When you look at a river from a distance, Kimya, you might think there is only one watercourse. But if
you dive into the water, you’ll realize there is more than one river. The river conceals various currents,
all of them flowing in harmony and yet completely separate from one another.”
Upon saying that, Shams of Tabriz approached me and held my chin between his two fingers, forcing
me to look directly into his deep, dark, soulful eyes. My heart skipped a beat. I couldn’t even breathe.
“The Qur’an is a gushing river,” he said. “Those who look at it from a distance see only one river. But
for those swimming in it, there are four currents. Like different types of fish, some of us swim closer to
the surface while some others swim in deep waters down below.”
“I’m afraid I don’t understand,” I said, although I was beginning to.
“Those who like to swim close to the surface are content with the outer meaning of the Qur’an. Many
people are like that. They take the verses too literally. No wonder when they read a verse like the Nisa,
they arrive at the conclusion that men are held superior to women. Because that is exactly what they want
to see.”
“How about the other currents?” I asked.
Shams sighed softly, and I couldn’t help noticing his mouth, as mysterious and inviting as a secret
garden.
“There are three more currents. The second one is deeper than the first, but still close to the surface. As
your awareness expands, so does your grasp of the Qur’an. But for that to happen, you need to take the
plunge.”
Listening to him, I felt both empty and fulfilled at the same time. “What happens when you take the
plunge?” I asked cautiously.
“The third undercurrent is the esoteric, batini, reading. If you read the Nisa with your inner eye open,
you’ll see that the verse is not about women and men but about womanhood and manhood. And each and
every one of us, including you and me, has both femininity and masculinity in us, in varying degrees and
shades. Only when we learn to embrace both can we attain harmonious Oneness.”
“Are you telling me that I have manliness inside me?”
“Oh, yes, definitely. And I have a female side, too.”
I couldn’t help but chuckle. “And Rumi? How about him?”
Shams smiled fleetingly. “Every man has a degree of womanliness inside.”
“Even the ones who are manly men?”
“Especially those, my dear,” Shams said, garnishing his words with a wink and dropping his voice to a
whisper, as if sharing a secret.
I stifled a giggle, feeling like a little girl. That was the impact of having Shams so close. He was a
strange man, his voice oddly charming, his hands lithe and muscular, and his stare like a crease of
sunlight, making everything that it fell upon look more intense and alive. Next to him I felt my youth in all
its fullness, and yet somewhere inside me a maternal instinct sprawled, exuding the thick, milky scent of
motherhood. I wanted to protect him. How or from what, I could not tell.
Shams put his hand on my shoulder, his face so close to mine that I could feel the warmth of his breath.
There was now a new, dreamy gaze to his eyes. He held me captive with his touch, caressing my cheeks,
his fingertips as warm as a flame against my skin. I was flabbergasted. Now his finger moved down,
reaching my bottom lip. Baffled and giddy, I closed my eyes, feeling a lifetime’s worth of excitement
welling up in my stomach. But no sooner had he touched my lips than Shams drew his hand back.
“You should go now, dear Kimya,” Shams murmured, making my name sound like a sad word.
I walked out, my head dizzy and my cheeks flushed.
Only after I went to my room, reclined on my back on the sleeping mat, and stared up at the ceiling,
wondering how it would feel to be kissed by Shams, did it dawn upon me that I had forgotten to ask him
about the fourth undercurrent in the stream—the deeper reading of the Qur’an. What was it? How could
one ever achieve that kind of depth?
And what happened to those who took the plunge?
Sultan Walad
KONYA, SEPTEMBER 4, 1245
Being his older brother, I have always worried for Aladdin, but never as much as I do now. He has
always had a quick temper, even as a toddler, but lately he is more quarrelsome and easily incensed.
Ready to squabble over almost anything, no matter how senseless or small, he is so petulant these days
that even the children on the street take fright when they see him coming. Only seventeen, he has creases
around his eyes from frowning and squinting too much. Just this morning I noticed a new wrinkle next to
his mouth from holding it in a tight line all the time.
I was busy writing on sheepskin parchment when I heard a faint rattling sound behind me. It was
Aladdin, his lips set in a tense scowl. God knows how long he had been standing there like that, watching
me with a strained look in his brown eyes. He asked me what I was doing.
“I’m copying an old lecture of our father’s,” I said. “It’s good to have an extra copy of every one of
them.”
“What’s the use of it?” Aladdin exhaled loudly. “Father has stopped giving lectures or sermons. In case
you haven’t noticed, he doesn’t teach at the madrassa either. Don’t you see he has thrust aside all his
responsibilities?”
“This is a temporary situation,” I said. “He’ll soon start teaching again.”
“You are only fooling yourself. Don’t you see that our father doesn’t have time for anything or anyone
other than Shams? Isn’t that funny? The man is supposed to be a wandering dervish, but he has taken root
in our house.”
Aladdin emitted a chuckle, waiting for me to agree with him, but when I said nothing, he started pacing
the room. Even without looking at him, I could feel the angry blaze in his eyes.
“People are gossiping,” Aladdin went on morosely. “They are all asking the same question: How can a
respected scholar let himself be manipulated by a heretic? Our father’s reputation is like ice melting
under the sun. If he doesn’t get a hold of himself soon, he might never be able to find students again in this
town. Nobody would want him as a teacher. And I wouldn’t blame them.”
I placed the parchment aside and looked at my brother. He was only a boy, really, although his every
gesture and expression said he felt on the edge of manhood. He had changed a lot since last year, and I
was beginning to suspect he could be in love. Just who the girl could be, I didn’t know, and his close
friends wouldn’t tell me.
“Brother, I realize you don’t like Shams, but he is a guest in our house and we ought to respect him.
Don’t listen to what others say. Honestly, we shouldn’t make a mountain out of a molehill.”
As soon as these words came from my mouth, I regretted my patronizing tone. But it was too late. Like
bone-dry wood, Aladdin easily catches fire.
“A molehill?!” Aladdin snorted. “Is that what you call this calamity that has befallen us? How can you
be so blind?”
I took out another parchment, caressing its delicate surface. It always gave me tremendous pleasure to
reproduce my father’s words and to think that in doing so I was helping them to last longer. Even after a
hundred years passed, people could read my father’s teachings and be inspired by them. To play a role in
this transmission, however small a role it might be, made me proud.
Still complaining, Aladdin stood next to me and glanced at my work, his eyes brooding and bitter. For a
fleeting moment, I saw a longing in his eyes and recognized the face of a boy in need of his father’s love.
With a plunging heart, I realized it wasn’t Shams he was truly angry at. It was my father.
Aladdin was angry at my father for not loving him enough and for being who he was. My father could
be distinguished and famous, but he had also been utterly helpless in the face of the death that had taken
our mother at such a tender age.
“They say Shams put a spell on our father,” Aladdin said. “They say he was sent by the Assassins.”
“The Assassins!” I protested. “That is nonsense.”
The Assassins were a sect famous for their meticulous killing methods and extensive use of poisonous
substances. Targeting influential people, they murdered their victims in public, so as to plant fear and
panic in people’s hearts. They had gone as far as leaving a poisoned cake in Saladin’s tent with a note
that said You are in our hands. And Saladin, this great commandeer of Islam who had fought bravely
against the Christian Crusaders and recaptured Jerusalem, had not dared to fight against the Assassins,
preferring to make peace with them. How could people think Shams could be linked with this sect of
terror?
I put my hand on Aladdin’s shoulder and forced him to look at me. “Besides, don’t you know the sect is
not what it used to be? They are barely more than a name now.”
Aladdin briefly considered this possibility. “Yes, but they say there were three very loyal
commandeers of Hassan Sabbah. They left the castle of Alamut, pledging to spread terror and trouble
wherever they went. People suspect that Shams is their leader.”
I was starting to lose patience. “God help me! And could you please tell me why a Hashshashin would
want to kill our father?”
“Because they hate influential people and love to create chaos, that’s why,” Aladdin responded. So
agitated was he by his conspiracy theories that red blotches had formed on his cheeks.
I knew I had to handle this more carefully. “Look, people say all sorts of things all the time,” I said.
“You can’t take these awful rumors seriously. Clear your mind of spiteful thoughts. They are poisoning
you.”
Aladdin groaned resentfully, but I continued nonetheless. “You might not like Shams personally. You
do not have to. But for Father’s sake you ought to show him some respect.”
Aladdin looked at me with bitterness and contempt. I understood that my younger brother was not only
cross with our father and infuriated at Shams. He was also disappointed in me. He saw my appreciation
of Shams as a sign of weakness. Perhaps he thought that in order to earn my father’s favor, I was being
subservient and spineless. It was only a suspicion on my part, but one that hurt me deeply.
Still, I could not get angry at him, and even if I did, my anger would not last very long. He was my little
brother. To me he would always be that boy running after street cats, getting his feet dirty in rain puddles,
and nibbling slices of bread topped with yogurt all day long. I couldn’t help seeing in his face the boy he
once had been, a bit on the plump side and a tad short for his age, the boy who took the news of the death
of his mother without shedding a tear. All he did was to look down at his feet as if suddenly ashamed of
his shoes and purse his bottom lip until its color was gone. Neither a word nor a sob had come out of his
mouth. I wish he would have cried.
“Do you remember the time you got into a fight with some neighboring kids?” I asked. “You came home
crying, with a bloody nose. What did our mother tell you then?”
Aladdin’s eyes first narrowed and then grew in recognition, but he didn’t say anything.
“She told you that whenever you got angry with someone, you should replace the face of that person in
your mind with the face of someone you love. Have you tried replacing Shams’s face with our mother’s
face? Perhaps you could find something to like in him.”
A furtive smile, as swift and timid as a passing cloud, hovered over Aladdin’s lips, and I was amazed
at how much it softened his expression.
“Perhaps I could,” he said, all anger draining out of his voice now.
My heart melted. I gave my brother a hug, unsure of what else to say. As he hugged me back, I felt
confident that he would repair his relationship with Shams and the harmony in our house would soon be
restored.
Given the course of events that followed, I couldn’t have been more mistaken.
Kerra
KONYA, OCTOBER 22, 1245
Beyond the closed door, Shams and Rumi were talking fervently about God knows what the other day. I
knocked and entered without waiting for a response, carrying a tray with a plate of halva. Normally
Shams doesn’t say anything when I am around, as if my presence forces him into silence. And he never
comments upon my cooking skills. He eats very little anyhow. Sometimes I have the impression it makes
no difference to him whether I serve a fabulous dinner or dry bread. But this time as soon as he took a bite
from my halva, his eyes lit up.
“This is delicious, Kerra. How did you make it?” he asked.
I don’t know what came over me. Instead of seeing the compliment for what it was, I heard myself
retort, “Why are you asking? Even if I told you how, you couldn’t make it.”
Shams locked a level gaze into my eyes and nodded slightly, as if he agreed with what I’d said. I
waited for him to say something in return, but he just stood there, mute and calm.
In a little while, I left the room and returned to the kitchen, thinking the incident was left behind. And I
probably would not have remembered it again, had it not been for what transpired this morning.
I was churning butter by the hearth in the kitchen when I heard strange voices out in the courtyard. I rushed
outside, only to witness the craziest scene ever. There were books everyplace, piled up in rickety towers,
and still more books floating inside the fountain. From all the ink dissolving in it, the water in the fountain
had turned a vivid blue.
With Rumi standing right there, Shams picked a book from the pile—The Collected Poems of alMutanabbi—eyed
it with a grim expression, and tossed it into the water. No sooner had the book
submerged than he reached for another. This time it was Attar’s The Book of Secrets.
I gasped in horror. One by one, he was destroying Rumi’s favorite books! The next to be hurled into the
water was The Divine Sciences by Rumi’s father. Knowing how much Rumi adored his father and doted
upon this old manuscript, I looked at him, expecting him to throw a fit.
Instead I found Rumi standing aside, his face pale as wax, his hands trembling. I couldn’t understand
for the life of me why he didn’t say anything. The man who once had reprimanded me for just dusting his
books was now watching a lunatic destroy his entire library, and yet he didn’t even utter a word. It wasn’t
fair. If Rumi wasn’t going to intervene, I would.
“What are you doing?” I asked Shams. “These books have no other copies. They are very valuable.
Why are you throwing them into the water? Have you lost your mind?”
Instead of an answer, Shams cocked his head toward Rumi. “Is that what you think, too?” he asked.
Rumi pursed his lips and smiled faintly but remained silent.
“Why don’t you say anything?” I yelled at my husband.
At this, Rumi approached me and held my hand tightly. “Calm down, Kerra, please. I trust in Shams.”
Giving me a glance over his shoulder, relaxed and confident, Shams rolled up his sleeves and started to
pull the books out of the water. To my amazement, every single book he took out was as dry as a bone.
“Is this magic? How did you do that?” I asked.
“But why are you asking?” Shams said. “Even if I told you how, you couldn’t do it.”
Trembling with anger, choking back sobs, I ran to the kitchen, which has become my sanctuary these
days. And there, amid pots and pans, stacks of herbs and spices, I sat down and cried my heart out.
Rumi
KONYA, DECEMBER 1245
Bent on praying the morning prayer together in the open air, Shams and I left the house shortly after dawn.
We rode our horses for a while, through meadows and valleys and across ice-cold streams, enjoying the
breeze on our faces. Scarecrows in wheat fields greeted us with an eerie poise, and newly washed
clothes in front of a farmhouse fluttered madly in the breeze as we passed by, pointing in all directions
into the semidarkness.
On the way back, Shams pulled at the reins of his horse and pointed to a massive oak tree outside the
town. Together we sat under the tree, the sky hanging above our heads in shades of purple. Shams placed
his cloak on the ground, and as calls to prayer echoed from mosques near and far, we prayed there
together.
“When I first came to Konya, I sat under this tree,” Shams said. He smiled at a distant memory, but then
grew pensive and said, “A peasant gave me a ride. He was a great admirer of yours. He told me your
sermons cured sadness.”
“They used to call me the Wizard of Words,” I said. “But it all feels so far away now. I don’t want to
give sermons anymore. I feel like I am done.”
“You are the Wizard of Words,” Shams said determinedly. “But instead of a preaching mind, you have
a chanting heart now.”
I didn’t know what he meant by that, and I didn’t ask. The dawn had erased what remained of the night
before, turning the sky into a blameless orange. Far ahead of us, the town was waking up, crows were
diving into vegetable gardens to peck at whatever they could steal, doors were screeching, donkeys
braying, and stoves burning as everyone got ready for a brand-new day.
“People everywhere are struggling on their own for fulfillment, but without any guidance as to how to
achieve it,” murmured Shams with a shake of his head. “Your words help them. And I’ll do everything in
my power to help you. I am your servant.”
“Don’t say that,” I protested. “You are my friend.”
Oblivious to my objection, Shams continued. “My only concern is the shell you have been living in. As
a famous preacher, you have been surrounded by fawning admirers. But how well do you know common
people? Drunks, beggars, thieves, prostitutes, gamblers—the most inconsolable and the most
downtrodden. Can we love all of God’s creatures? It is a difficult test, and one that only a few can pass.”
As he kept speaking, I saw gentleness and concern in his face, and something else that looked almost
like maternal compassion.
“You are right,” I conceded. “I have always lived a protected life. I don’t even know how ordinary
people live.”
Shams picked up a lump of soil, and as he crumbled it between his fingers, he added softly, “If we can
embrace the universe as a whole, with all its differences and contradictions, everything will melt into
One.”
With this, Shams picked up a dead branch and drew a large circle around the oak tree. When he was
done, he raised his arms toward the sky, as if wishing to be pulled up by an invisible rope, and uttered the
ninety-nine names of God. At the same time, he began to whirl inside the circle, first slowly and tenderly
but then accelerating steadily, like a late-afternoon breeze. Soon he was whirling with the speed and
might of gusty winds. So captivating was his frenzy that I couldn’t help but feel as if the whole universe—
the earth, the stars, and the moon—spun with him. I watched this most unusual dance, letting the energy it
radiated envelop my soul and body.
Finally Shams slowed down to a halt, his chest rising and falling with every ragged breath, his face
white, his voice suddenly deep, as if coming from a distant place. “The universe is one being.
Everything and everyone is interconnected through an invisible web of stories. Whether we are aware
of it or not, we are all in a silent conversation. Do no harm. Practice compassion. And do not gossip
behind anyone’s back—not even a seemingly innocent remark! The words that come out of our mouths
do not vanish but are perpetually stored in infinite space, and they will come back to us in due time.
One man’s pain will hurt us all. One man’s joy will make everyone smile,” he murmured. “This is what
one of the forty rules reminds us.”
Then he turned his inquisitive gaze to me. There was a shadow of despair in the bottomless depths of
his eyes, a wave of sorrow that I had never seen in him before.
“One day you will be known as the Voice of Love,” Shams remarked. “East and West, people who
have never seen your face will be inspired by your voice.”
“How is that going to happen?” I asked incredulously.
“Through your words,” Shams answered. “But I am not talking about lectures or sermons. I am talking
about poetry.”
“Poetry?” My voice cracked. “I don’t write poetry. I am a scholar.”
This elicited a subtle smile from Shams. “You, my friend, are one of the finest poets the world will
ever come to know.”
I was about to protest, but the determined look in Shams’s eyes stopped me. Besides, I didn’t feel like
arguing. “Even so, whatever needs to be done, we will do it together. We will walk on this path
together.”
Shams nodded absently and lapsed into an eerie silence, gazing at the fading colors in the horizon.
When he finally spoke, he uttered those ominous words that have never left me, scarring my soul
permanently: “As much as I would love to join you, I’m afraid you will have to do it alone.”
“What do you mean? Where are you going?” I asked.
With a wistful pucker of the lips, Shams lowered his gaze. “It is not in my hands.”
A sudden wind blew in our direction, and the weather turned chilly, as if warning us that the fall would
soon be over. It began to rain out of the clear blue sky, in light, warm drops, as faint and delicate as the
touch of butterflies. And that was the first time the thought of Shams’s leaving me hit me like a sharp pain
in the chest.
Sultan Walad
KONYA, DECEMBER 1245
Banter to some, but it pains me to hear the gossip. How can people be so disdainful and scornful with
regard to things they know so little about? It is queer, if not frightening, how out of touch with truth people
are! They don’t understand the depth of the bond between my father and Shams. Apparently they haven’t
read the Qur’an. Because if they had, they would know that there are similar stories of spiritual
companionship, such as the story of Moses and Khidr.
It is in the verse al-Kahf, clear and plain. Moses was an exemplary man, great enough to become a
prophet someday, as well as a legendary commander and lawmaker. But there was a time when he sorely
needed a spiritual companion to open his third eye. And that companion was no other than Khidr, the
Comforter of the Distressed and Dejected.
Khidr said to Moses, “I am a lifelong traveler. God has assigned me to roam the world and do what
needs to be done. You say you want to join me in my journeys, but if you follow me, you must not question
anything I do. Can you bear to accompany me without questioning? Can you trust me fully?”
“Yes, I can,” Moses assured him. “Let me come with you. I promise, I won’t ask you any questions.”
So they set out on the road, visiting various towns on the way. But when he witnessed Khidr perform
senseless actions, like killing a young boy or sinking a boat, Moses could not hold his tongue. “Why did
you do those awful things?” he asked desperately.
“What happened to your promise?” Khidr asked back. “Did I not tell you that you can ask me no
questions?”
Each time Moses apologized, promising not to ask anything, and each time he broke his promise. In the
end, Khidr explained the reason behind each and every one of his actions. Slowly but surely, Moses
understood that things that can seem malicious or unfortunate are often a blessing in disguise, whereas
things that might seem pleasant can be harmful in the long run. His brief companionship with Khidr was to
be the most eye-opening experience in his life.
As in this parable, there are friendships in this world that seem incomprehensible to ordinary people
but are in fact conduits to deeper wisdom and insight. This is how I regard Shams’s presence in my
father’s life.
But I know that other people don’t see it in the same way, and I am worried. Unfortunately, Shams does
not make it easy for people to like him. Sitting at the gate of the seminary in an embarrassingly tyrannical
manner, he stops and interrogates everyone who wants to go in to talk to my father.
“What do you want to see the great Mawlana for?” he asks. “What did you bring as a gift?”
Not knowing what to say, people stammer and falter, even apologize. And Shams sends them away.
Some of these visitors return in a few days with presents, carrying dried fruits, silver dirhams, silk
carpets, or newborn lambs. But seeing these goods annoys Shams even more. His black eyes aglow, his
face glittering with fervor, he chases them away again.
One day a man got so upset with Shams he shouted, “What gives you the right to block Mawlana’s
door? You keep asking everyone what they are bringing! How about you? What did you bring him?”
“I brought myself,” Shams said, just loud enough to be heard. “I sacrificed my head for him.”
The man trudged off, mumbling something under his breath, looking more confused than enraged.
The same day I asked Shams if it didn’t trouble him that he was so widely misunderstood and
underappreciated. Scarcely able to contain my apprehension, I pointed out that he had gained many
enemies lately.
Shams looked at me blankly, as if he had no idea what I was talking about. “But I have no enemies,” he
said with a shrug. “The lovers of God can have critics and even rivals, but they cannot have enemies.”
“Yes, but you quarrel with people,” I objected.
Shams bristled with fervor. “I don’t quarrel with them, I quarrel with their ego. That’s different.”
Then he added softly, “It is one of the forty rules: This world is like a snowy mountain that echoes
your voice. Whatever you speak, good or evil, will somehow come back to you. Therefore, if there is
someone who harbors ill thoughts about you, saying similarly bad things about him will only make
matters worse. You will be locked in a vicious circle of malevolent energy. Instead for forty days and
nights say and think nice things about that person. Everything will be different at the end of forty days,
because you will be different inside.”
“But people are saying all sorts of things about you. They even say for two men to be so fond of each
other there has to be an unspeakable bond between them,” I said, my voice failing me toward the end.
Upon hearing this, Shams put his hand on my arm and smiled his usual calming smile. He then told me a
story.
Two men were traveling from one town to another. They came to a stream that had risen due to
heavy rainfall. Just when they were about to cross the water, they noticed a young, beautiful woman
standing there all alone, in need of help. One of the men immediately went to her side. He picked the
woman up and carried her in his arms across the stream. Then he dropped her there, waved good-bye,
and the two men went their way.
During the rest of the trip, the second traveler was unusually silent and sullen, not responding to
his friend’s questions. After several hours of sulking, unable to keep silent anymore, he said, “Why did
you touch that woman? She could have seduced you! Men and women cannot come into contact like
that!”
The first man responded calmly, “My friend, I carried the woman across the stream, and that is
where I left her. It is you who have been carrying her ever since.”
“Some people are like that,” Shams said. “They carry their own fears and biases on their shoulders,
crushed under all that weight. If you hear of anyone who cannot comprehend the depth of the bond
between your father and me, tell him to wash his mind!”
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, JUNE 15, 2008
Beloved Ella,
You asked me how I became a Sufi. It didn’t happen overnight.
I was born Craig Richardson in Kinlochbervie, a harbor village in the Highlands of Scotland. Whenever I think about the past, I
fondly remember the fishing boats, their nets heavy with fish and strands of seaweed dangling like green snakes, sandpipers scurrying
along the shore pecking at worms, ragwort plants growing in the most unexpected places, and the smell of the sea in the background,
sharp and salty. That smell, as well as those of the mountains and lochs, and the dreary tranquillity of life in postwar Europe composed
the background against which my childhood was set.
While the world tumbled heavily into the 1960s and became the scene of student demonstrations, hijackings, and revolutions, I was
cut off from it all in my quiet, green corner. My father owned a secondhand-book store, and my mother raised sheep that produced
high-quality wool. As a child I had a touch of both the loneliness of a shepherd and the introspectiveness of a bookseller. Many days I
would climb an old tree and gaze out at the scenery, convinced that I would spend my whole life there. Every now and then, my heart
would constrict with a longing for adventures, but I liked Kinlochbervie and was happy with the predictability of my life. How could I
know that God had other plans for me?
Shortly after I turned twenty, I discovered the two things that would change my life forever. The first was a professional camera. I
enrolled in a photography class, not knowing that what I saw as a simple hobby would become a lifelong passion. The second was love
—a Dutch woman who was touring Europe with friends. Her name was Margot.
She was eight years my elder, beautiful, tall, and remarkably headstrong. Margot regarded herself as a bohemian, an idealist, a
radical, a bisexual, a leftist, an individualist anarchist, a multiculturalist, a human-rights advocate, a counterculture activist, an ecofeminist
—labels I couldn’t even define should one ask me what they meant. But I had early on observed that she was one more thing: a
pendulum woman. Capable of swinging from extreme joy to extreme depression in the span of a few minutes, Margot had
unpredictability written all over her. Always furious at what she construed as “the hypocrisy of the bourgeois lifestyle,” she questioned
every detail in life, waging battles against society. To this day it is still a mystery to me why I did not run away from her. But I didn’t.
Instead I let myself get sucked into the whirling vortex of her animated personality. I was head over heels in love.
She was an impossible combination, full of revolutionary ideas, unbridled courage, and creativity, yet as fragile as a crystal flower. I
promised myself to stay by her side and protect her not only from the outside world but also from herself. Did she ever love me as
much as I loved her? I don’t think so. But I know she did love me in her own self-centered and self-destructive way.
This is how I ended up in Amsterdam at the age of twenty. We got married there. Margot dedicated her time to helping refugees
who had found themselves in Europe for political or humanitarian reasons. Working for an organization that specialized in immigrants’
needs, she helped traumatized people from the most troubled corners of the world find their feet in Holland. She was their guardian
angel. Families from Indonesia, Somalia, Argentina, and Palestine named their daughters after her.
As for me, I wasn’t interested in greater causes, being too busy working my way up the corporate ladder. After graduating from
business school, I started working for an international firm. The fact that Margot didn’t care about my status or salary made me yearn
even more for the trinkets of success. Hungry for power, I wanted to sink my teeth into important works.
I had our life completely planned out. In two years we would start having children. Two little girls completed my picture of an ideal
family. I was confident of the future that awaited us. After all, we lived in one of the safest places on earth, not in one of those troubled
countries that kept pumping immigrants into the European continent like a broken faucet. We were young, healthy, and in love. Nothing
could go wrong. It is hard to believe I am fifty-four years old now and Margot is no longer alive.
She was the healthy one. A staunch vegan at a time when the word hadn’t been coined, she ate only healthy things, exercised
routinely, stayed away from drugs. Her angelic face brimmed with health, her body was always thin, brisk, and angular. She took such
good care of herself that despite the age difference between us, I looked older than she did.
She died a most unexpected and simple death. One night, on her way back from a visit to a famous Russian journalist who had
applied for asylum, her car broke down in the middle of the highway. And she, who always abided by the rules, did something
completely out of her character. Instead of putting on the flashers and waiting for help, she got out of the car and decided to walk to the
next village. Wearing a taupe trench coat with dark trousers, she didn’t have a flashlight or anything that would make her more
noticeable. A vehicle hit her—a trailer from Yugoslavia. The driver said he never saw her. So completely had Margot melted into the
night.
I was a boy once. Love opened up my eyes to a more fulfilled life. After I lost the woman I loved, I metamorphosed drastically.
Neither a boy nor an adult, I became a trapped animal. This stage of my life I call my encounter with the letter S in the word “Sufi.”
I hope I haven’t bored you with such a long letter.
Love,
Aziz
Desert Rose the Harlot
KONYA, JANUARY 1246
Barring me from much these days, ever since the scandal I caused at the mosque, the patron doesn’t let me
go anywhere. I am grounded forever. But it doesn’t upset me. The truth is, I haven’t been feeling much of
anything lately.
Every morning the face that greets me in the mirror looks paler. I don’t comb my hair or pinch my
cheeks to redden them anymore. The other girls constantly complain about my bad looks, saying that it
keeps the customers away. They may be right. Which is why I was quite surprised when the other day I
was told that a particular client insisted on seeing me.
To my horror, it turned out to be Baybars.
As soon as we were alone in the room, I asked, “What is a security guard like you doing here?”
“Well, my coming to a brothel is no more bizarre than a harlot going to a mosque,” he said, his voice
heavy with insinuation.
“I am sure you would have loved to lynch me that day,” I said. “I owe my life to Shams of Tabriz.”
“Don’t mention that revolting name. That guy is a heretic!”
“No, he is not!” I don’t know what came over me, but I heard myself say, “Since that day Shams of
Tabriz has come to see me many times.”
“Hah! A dervish in a brothel!” Baybars snorted. “Why am I not surprised?”
“It’s not like that,” I said. “It’s not like that at all.”
I had never told this to anyone else before and had no idea why I was telling Baybars now, but Shams
had been visiting me every week for the past several months. How he managed to sneak inside without
being seen by the others, especially by the patron, was beyond my comprehension. Anyone else would
assume that it was with the aid of black magic. But I knew it wasn’t that. He was a good man, Shams. A
man of faith. And he had special talents. Other than my mother back in my childhood, Shams was the only
person who treated me with unconditional compassion. He had taught me not to be despondent, no matter
what. Whenever I told him there was no way someone like me could shed the past, he would remind me of
one of his rules: The past is an interpretation. The future is an illusion. The world does not move
through time as if it were a straight line, proceeding from the past to the future. Instead time moves
through and within us, in endless spirals.
Eternity does not mean infinite time, but simply timelessness.
If you want to experience eternal illumination, put the past and the future out of your mind and
remain within the present moment.
Shams always told me, “You see, the present moment is all there is and all that there ever will be.
When you grasp this truth, you’ll have nothing to fear anymore. Then you can walk out of this brothel for
good.”
Baybars was watching my face carefully. When he looked at me, his right eye looked off to the side. It felt
as if there were another person in the room with us, someone I couldn’t see. He scared me.
Realizing that it would be best not to talk about Shams anymore, I served him a pitcher of beer, which
he drank in a hurry.
“So what is your specialty?” Baybars asked after he guzzled his second beer. “Don’t you girls each
have a talent? Can you belly dance?”
I told him I didn’t have such talents and whatever gift I had in the past was gone now, as I was suffering
from an unknown illness. The boss would have killed me if she heard me say such things to a client, but I
didn’t care. The truth was, I secretly hoped Baybars would spend the night with another girl.
But, to my disappointment, Baybars shrugged and said he didn’t care. Then he took out his pouch,
spilled a reddish brown substance from it into his palm, and popped it into his mouth, chewing slowly.
“Do you want some?” he asked.
I shook my head. I knew what it was.
“You don’t know what you are missing.” He grinned as he reclined on the bed, drifting away from his
own body into a stupor of cannabis.
That evening, high on beer and cannabis, Baybars bragged about the terrible things he had seen on the
battlefields. Even though Genghis Khan was dead and his flesh decomposed, his ghost still accompanied
the Mongol armies, Baybars said. Egged on by the ghost, the Mongol army was attacking caravans,
plundering villages, and massacring women and men alike. He told me about the veil of silence, as soft
and peaceful as a blanket on a cold winter night, that descended upon a battlefield after hundreds had been
killed and wounded, and dozens more were about to give up their last breath.
“The silence that follows a massive disaster is the most peaceful sound you can hear on the surface of
the world,” he said, his voice slurring.
“It sounds so sad,” I murmured.
Suddenly he had no more words inside him. There was nothing else to talk about. Grabbing my arm, he
pushed me onto the bed and pulled off my robe. His eyes were bloodshot, his voice hoarse, and his smell
was a repugnant mixture of cannabis, sweat, and hunger. He entered me in one harsh, abrasive thrust. I
tried to move aside and relax my thighs to lessen the pain, but he pressed both hands on my bosom with
such force that it was impossible to budge. He kept rocking back and forth even long after he came inside
me, like a string puppet that was manipulated by unseen hands and could not possibly stop. Clearly
dissatisfied, he kept moving with such roughness that I feared he was going to get hard again, but then
suddenly it all came to an end. Still on top of me, he looked at my face with pure hatred, as if the body that
had aroused him a moment ago now disgusted him.
“Put something on,” he ordered as he rolled aside.
I put on my robe, watching out of the corner of my eye as he popped more cannabis into his mouth.
“From now on, I want you to be my mistress,” he said with his jaw jutting out.
It wasn’t all that uncommon for clients to come up with such demands. I knew how to handle these
delicate situations, giving the client the false impression that I would love to be his mistress and serve
solely him, but for that to happen he had to spend a lot of money and make the patron happy first. But
today I didn’t feel like pretending.
“I can’t be your mistress,” I said. “I am going to leave this place very soon.”
Baybars guffawed as if this were the funniest thing he had ever heard. “You can’t do that,” he said with
certainty.
I knew I shouldn’t be quarreling with him, but I couldn’t help it. “You and I are not that different. We
both have done things in the past that we deeply regret. But you have been made a security guard, thanks to
your uncle’s position. I have no uncle backing me, you see.”
Baybars’s face became wooden, and his eyes, cold and distant up till now, suddenly widened with
fury. Dashing forward, he grabbed me by the hair. “I was nice to you, wasn’t I?” he growled. “Who do
you think you are?”
I opened my mouth to say something, but a sharp stab of pain silenced me. Baybars punched me in the
face and pushed me against the wall.
It wasn’t the first time. I had been beaten by clients before but never this badly.
I fell on the floor, and then Baybars started to kick me hard in the ribs and legs while hurling insults at me.
It was then and there that I had the strangest experience. As I cringed in pain, my body crushed under the
weight of each blow, my soul—or what felt like it—separated from my body, turning itself into a kite,
light and free.
Soon I was floating in the ether. As if thrown into a peaceful vacuum where there was nothing to resist
and nowhere to go, I simply hovered. I passed over recently harvested wheat fields, where the wind
fluttered the head scarves of peasant girls and at night, fireflies glinted here and there like fairy lights. It
felt like falling, except falling upward into the bottomless sky.
Was I dying? If this was what death was like, it wasn’t terrifying at all. My worries diminished. I had
tumbled into a place of absolute lightness and purity, a magic zone where nothing could pull me down.
And suddenly I realized I was living my fear and, to my surprise, it wasn’t frightful. Wasn’t it because of
the fear of being harmed that I had been scared to leave the brothel all this time? If I could manage not to
be scared of death, I realized with an expanding heart, I could leave this rat hole.
Shams of Tabriz was right. The only filth was the filth inside. I shut my eyes and imagined this other
me, pristine and penitent and looking much younger, walking out of the brothel and into a new life.
Glowing with youth and confidence, this was what my face would have looked like if only I’d
experienced security and love in my life. The vision was so alluring and so very real, despite the blood
before my eyes and the throbbing in my ribs, that I couldn’t help smiling.
Kimya
KONYA, JANUARY 1246
Blushing and sweating slightly, I mustered the courage to talk to Shams of Tabriz. I had been meaning to
ask him about the deepest reading of the Qur’an, but for weeks I hadn’t had a chance. Though we lived
under the same roof, our paths never crossed. But this morning as I was sweeping the courtyard, Shams
appeared next to me, alone and in the mood to chat. And this time not only did I manage to talk with him
longer, but I also managed to look him in the eye.
“How is it going, dear Kimya?” he asked jovially.
I couldn’t help noticing that Shams looked dazed, as if he had just woken up from sleep, or else another
vision. I knew he had been having visions, lately more often than ever, and by now I had learned to read
the signs. Each time he had a vision, his face became pale and his eyes dreamy.
“A storm is impending,” Shams murmured, squinting at the sky, where grayish flakes swirled, heralding
the first snow of the year.
This seemed the right time to ask him the question I had been holding inside. “Remember when you told
me that we all understood the Qur’an in accordance with the depth of our insight?” I said carefully. “Ever
since then I have been meaning to ask you about the fourth level.”
Now Shams turned toward me, his gaze raking my face. I liked it when he stared at me so attentively. I
thought he was his handsomest at times like this, his lips pursed, his forehead slightly creased.
“The fourth level is unspeakable,” he said. “There is a stage after which language fails us. When you
step into the zone of love, you won’t need language.”
“I wish I could step into the zone of love someday,” I blurted, but then instantly felt embarrassed. “I
mean, so that I could read the Qur’an with deeper insight.”
An odd little smile etched Shams’s mouth. “If you have it in you, I am sure you will. You’ll dive into
the fourth current, and then you’ll be the stream.”
I had forgotten this mixed feeling that only Shams was capable of stirring in me. Next to him I felt both
like a child learning life anew and like a woman ready to nurture life inside my womb.
“What do you mean, ‘if you have it in you’?” I asked. “You mean, like destiny?”
“Yes, that’s right.” Shams nodded.
“But what does destiny mean?”
“I cannot tell you what destiny is. All I can tell you is what it isn’t. In fact, there is another rule
regarding this question. Destiny doesn’t mean that your life has been strictly predetermined. Therefore,
to leave everything to fate and to not actively contribute to the music of the universe is a sign of sheer
ignorance.
“The music of the universe is all-pervading and it is composed on forty different levels.
“Your destiny is the level where you will play your tune. You might not change your instrument but
how well to play is entirely in your hands.”
I must have given him a befuddled look, for Shams felt the need to explain. He placed his hand on mine,
gently squeezing. With dark, deep eyes glinting he said, “Allow me to tell you a story.”
And here is what he told me:
One day a young woman asked a dervish what fate was about. “Come with me,” the dervish said.
“Let’s take a look at the world together.” Soon they ran into a procession. A killer was being taken to
the plaza to be hanged. The dervish asked, “That man will be executed. But is that because somebody
gave him the money with which he bought his murder weapon? Or is it because nobody stopped him
while he was committing the crime? Or is it because someone caught him afterward? Where is the
cause and effect in this case?”
I interjected, cutting his story short, and said, “That man is going to be hanged because what he did was
awful. He is paying for what he did. There is the cause and there, too, the effect. There are good things
and bad things, and a difference between the two.”
“Ah, sweet Kimya,” Shams replied, in a small voice as if he suddenly felt tired. “You like distinctions
because you think they make life easier. What if things are not that clear all the time?”
“But God wants us to be clear. Otherwise there would be no notions of haram or halal. There would be
no hell and heaven. Imagine if you could not scare people with hell or encourage them with heaven. The
world would be a whole lot worse.”
Snowflakes skittered in the wind, and Shams leaned forward to pull my shawl tighter. For a passing
moment, I stood frozen, inhaling his smell. It was a mixture of sandalwood and soft amber with a faint,
crisp tang underneath, like the smell of earth after the rain. I felt a warm glow in the pit of my stomach and
a wave of desire between my legs. How embarrassing it was—and yet, oddly, not embarrassing at all.
“In love, boundaries are blurred,” said Shams, staring at me half compassionately, half concernedly.
Was he talking about the Love of God or the love between a woman and a man? Could he be referring
to us? Was there such a thing as “us”?
Unaware of my thoughts, Shams continued. “I don’t care about haram or halal. I’d rather extinguish the
fire in hell and burn heaven, so that people could start loving God for no other reason than love.”
“You shouldn’t go around saying such things. People are mean. Not everyone would understand,” I
said, not realizing that I would have to think more about this warning before its full implications could
sink in.
Shams smiled a brave, almost valiant smile. I allowed him to hold me captive, his palm feeling hot and
heavy against mine.
“Perhaps you are right, but don’t you think that gives me all the more reason to speak my mind?
Besides, narrow-minded people are deaf anyhow. To their sealed ears, whatever I say is sheer
blasphemy.”
“Whereas to me everything you say is only sweet!”
Shams looked at me with a disbelief that verged on astonishment. But I was more shocked than he was.
How could I have said such a thing? Had I taken leave of my senses? I must have been possessed by a
djinn or something.
“I’m sorry, I’d better go now,” I said as I jumped to my feet.
My cheeks burning with shame, my heart pounding with all the things we had said and left unsaid, I
scampered out of the courtyard back into the house. But even as I ran, I knew that a threshold had been
crossed. After this moment I could not ignore the truth that I had known all along: I was in love with
Shams of Tabriz.
Shams
KONYA, JANUARY 1246
Bad-mouthing one another is second nature to many people. I heard the rumors about me. Ever since I
came to Konya, there have been so many of them. It doesn’t surprise me. Although it clearly says in the
Qur’an that slandering is one of the gravest sins ever, most people make hardly any effort to avoid it. They
always condemn those who drink wine, or are on the lookout for adulterous women to stone, but when it
comes to gossiping, which is a far more serious sin in the eyes of God, they take no notice of any
wrongdoing.
All of this reminds me of a story.
One day a man came running to a Sufi and said, panting, “Hey, they are carrying trays, look over
there!”
The Sufi answered calmly, “What is it to us? Is it any of my business?”
“But they are taking those trays to your house!” the man exclaimed.
“Then is it any of your business?” the Sufi said.
Unfortunately, people always watch the trays of others. Instead of minding their own business, they
pass judgment on other people. It never ceases to amaze me the things they fabricate! Their imagination
knows no limits when it comes to suspicion and slander.
Apparently there are people in this town who believe that I am the secret commander of the Assassins.
Some go so far as to claim that I am the son of the last Ismaili imam of Alamut. They say I am so skilled in
black magic and witchcraft that whomever I curse will die on the spot. Some others even make the
outrageous accusation that I have put a spell on Rumi. Just to make sure he doesn’t break the spell, I force
him to drink snake soup every day at dawn!
When I hear such claptrap, I laugh and walk away. What else is there to do? What harm comes to a
dervish from the sourness of others? If the whole world were swallowed by the sea, what would it matter
to a duck?
Nevertheless, I can see that the people around me are worried, particularly Sultan Walad. He is such a
bright young man I am sure someday soon he will become his father’s best aide. And then there is Kimya,
sweet Kimya.… She, too, seems concerned. But the worst thing about the gossip is that Rumi gets his
share of vilification. Unlike me, he isn’t used to being bad-mouthed by others. It torments me to see him
distressed over the words of ignorant people. Mawlana has immense beauty inside. I, on the other hand,
have both beauty and ugliness. It is easier for me to deal with the ugliness of others than it is for him. But
how can an erudite scholar who is used to having serious conversations and logical conclusions handle
the claptrap of ignorant people?
No wonder the Prophet Muhammad said, “In this world take pity on three kinds of people. The rich
man who has lost his fortune, the well-respected man who has lost his respectability, and the wise man
who is surrounded by ignorants.”
And yet I can’t help thinking that there could be some good for Rumi in all this. Slander is a hurtful,
albeit necessary, element in Rumi’s inner transformation. His whole life he has been admired, respected,
and imitated, having a reputation beyond reproach. He doesn’t know how it feels to be misunderstood and
criticized by others. Nor has he been pestered by the sort of vulnerability and loneliness that one feels
from time to time. His ego has not been bruised, not even slightly damaged, by other people. But he needs
that. As hurtful as it is, being slandered is ultimately good for one on the path. It is Rule Number Thirty:
The true Sufi is such that even when he is unjustly accused, attacked, and condemned from all sides, he
patiently endures, uttering not a single bad word about any of his critics. A Sufi never apportions
blame. How can there be opponents or rivals or even “others” when there is no “self” in the first
place?
How can there be anyone to blame when there is only One?
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, JUNE 17, 2008
Beloved Ella,
You were kind enough to ask me to tell you more. Frankly, I do not find it easy to write about this period of my life for it brings back
unwanted memories. But here it is:
After Margot’s death my life underwent a dramatic change. Losing myself in a circle of addicts, becoming a regular at all-night
parties and dance clubs in an Amsterdam I had never known before, I looked for comfort and compassion in all the wrong places. I
became a night creature, befriended the wrong people, woke up in strangers’ beds, and lost more than twenty-five pounds in just a few
months.
The first time I sniffed heroin, I threw up and got so sick I couldn’t keep my head up the whole day. My body had rejected the drug.
It was a sign but I was in no state to see it. Before I knew it, I had replaced sniffing with injections. Marijuana, hashish, acid, cocaine—
I tried whatever I could get my hands on. It didn’t take me long to make a mess of myself, mentally and physically. Everything I did, I
did to stay high.
And when high I planned spectacular ways to kill myself. I even tried hemlock, in the manner of Socrates, but either its poison didn’t
have an effect on me or the dark herb I bought at the back door of a Chinese takeout was some ordinary plant. Perhaps they sold me
some kind of green tea and had a laugh at my expense. Many mornings I woke up in unfamiliar places with someone new by my side,
but with the same emptiness eating me up inside. Women took care of me. Some were younger than me, others much older. I lived in
their houses, slept in their beds, stayed in their summer resorts, ate the food they cooked, wore their husbands’ clothes, shopped with
their credit cards, and refused to give them even a speck of the love they demanded and no doubt deserved.
The life I had chosen quickly took its toll. I lost my job, I lost my friends, and finally I lost the apartment Margot and I had spent
many happy days in. When it became apparent that I couldn’t bear this lifestyle anymore, I stayed in squat houses where everything
was collective. I spent more than fifteen months at one squat house in Rotterdam. There were no doors in the building, neither outside
nor inside, not even in the bathroom. We shared everything. Our songs, dreams, pocket money, drugs, food, beds … Everything but the
pain.
Years into a life of drugs and debauchery, I hit rock bottom, a shadow of the man I used to be. As I was washing my face one
morning, I stared into the mirror. I had never seen anybody so young who was so drained and sad. I went back to bed and cried like a
child. The same day I rummaged through the boxes where I kept Margot’s belongings. Her books, clothes, records, hairpins, notes,
pictures—one by one, I bade farewell to every keepsake. Then I put them back in boxes and gave them away to the children of the
immigrants she cared so deeply about. It was 1977.
With the help of God-sent connections, I found a job at a well-known travel magazine as a photographer. This is how I embarked on
a journey to North Africa with a canvas suitcase and a framed picture of Margot, running away from the man I had become.
Then a British anthropologist I met in the Saharan Atlas gave me an idea. He asked me if I had ever considered being the first
Western photographer to sneak into the holiest cities of Islam. I didn’t know what he was talking about. He said there was a Saudi law
that strictly forbade non-Muslims from entering Mecca and Medina. No Christians or Jews were allowed, unless one found a way to
break in to the city and take pictures. If caught, you could go to jail, or even worse. I was all ears. The thrill of trespassing into
forbidden territory, achieving what no one else had accomplished before, the surge of adrenaline, not to mention the fame and money
that would come at the end … I was attracted to the idea like a bee drawn to a pot of honey.
The anthropologist said I could not do this alone and needed a connection. He suggested checking the Sufi brotherhoods in the area.
You never know, they might agree to help, he said.
I didn’t know anything about Sufism, and I couldn’t have cared less. As long as they offered to help, I was happy to meet the Sufis.
To me they were just a means to an end. But then, at the time, so was everyone and everything else.
Life is odd, Ella. In the end I never made it to Mecca or Medina. Not then, not later. Not even after I converted to Islam. Destiny
took me on a different route altogether, one of unexpected twists and turns, each of which changed me so profoundly and irrevocably
that after a while the original destination lost its significance. Though motivated by purely materialistic reasons at the outset, when the
journey came to an end, I was a transformed man.
As for the Sufis, who could have known that what I had initially seen as a means to an end would very soon become an end in
itself? This part of my life I call my encounter with the letter u in the word “Sufi.”
Love,
Aziz
Desert Rose the Harlot
KONYA, FEBRUARY 1246
Bitter and bleak, the day I left the brothel was the coldest day in forty years. The narrow, serpentine
streets glistened with fresh snow, and sharp pendants of ice hung from the roofs of the houses and the
minarets of the mosques in dangerous beauty. By midafternoon the chill had become so severe there were
frozen cats on the streets with whiskers turned into thin threads of ice, and several ramshackle houses
collapsed under the weight of the snow. After the street cats, Konya’s homeless suffered the most. There
were half a dozen frozen bodies—all curled up in the fetal position with beatific smiles on their faces, as
if expecting to be reborn into a better and warmer life.
Late in the afternoon, when everyone was taking a nap before the hustle of the evening began, I sneaked
out of my room. I took no more than a few simple clothes, leaving behind all the silk garments and
accessories I used to wear for special customers. Whatever was earned in the brothel had to stay in the
brothel.
Halfway down the stairs, I saw Magnolia standing at the main door, chewing the brown leaves she was
addicted to. Older than all the other girls in the brothel, lately she had been complaining about hot flashes.
At night I heard her toss and turn in bed. It was no secret that her womanhood was drying up. Younger
girls jokingly said they envied Magnolia, since she would not have to worry about having periods,
pregnancies, or abortions anymore and could sleep with a man every single day of the month, but we all
knew that an aged prostitute had little chance of survival.
As soon as I saw Magnolia standing there, I knew I had only two options: either return to my room and
forget about running away or walk through that door and bear the consequences. My heart chose the latter.
“Hey, Magnolia, are you feeling better?” I said, adopting what I hoped was a relaxed and casual tone
of voice.
Magnolia’s face brightened but then darkened again as she noticed the bag in my hand. There was no
point in lying. She knew that the patron had forbidden me to leave my room, never mind leaving the
brothel.
“Are you leaving?” Magnolia gasped as if the question scared her.
I didn’t say anything. Now it was her turn to make a choice. She could either stop me in my tracks and
alert everyone to my plan or simply let me go. Magnolia stared at me, her expression grave and
embittered.
“Go back to your room, Desert Rose,” she said. “The patron will send Jackal Head after you. Don’t
you know what he did to …?”
But she didn’t finish her sentence. That was one of the unwritten rules in the brothel: We didn’t bring
up the stories of the unfortunate girls who had worked here before us and had met a premature end, and on
those rare occasions when we did mention them, we took care not to utter their names. There was no point
in disturbing them in their graves. They had already led tough lives; it was better to let them rest.
“Even if you manage to escape, how are you going to make a living?” Magnolia insisted. “You will
starve to death.”
What I saw in Magnolia’s eyes was fear—not the fear that I could fail and be punished by the patron
but the fear that I might succeed. I was going to do the one thing she had always dreamed about and yet
never dared to carry out, and now she both respected and hated me for my audacity. I felt a momentary
pang of doubt and would have gone back had the voice of Shams of Tabriz not kept echoing in my head.
“Let me go, Magnolia,” I said. “I’m not staying here another day.”
After being beaten by Baybars and looking death in the face, I felt that something within me had
changed irreversibly. It was as if I had no more fear left inside me. One way or another, I didn’t care. I
was determined to dedicate what remained of my life to God. Whether this would be for a single day or
for many more years to come did not matter. Shams of Tabriz had said that faith and love turned human
beings into heroes because they removed all the fear and anxiety from their hearts. I was beginning to
understand what he meant.
And the strange thing is, Magnolia understood it, too. She gave me a long, painful look and slowly
moved aside, opening the way out for me.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, JUNE 19, 2008
Beloved Ella,
Thank you for being so compassionate. I’m glad you like my story and that you think about it a lot. I am not used to talking about my
past with anyone, and it strangely makes me lighter to share all this with you.
I spent the summer of 1977 with a group of Sufis in Morocco. My room was white, small, and simple. It had just the bare
necessities: a sleeping mat, an oil lamp, an amber rosary, a potted flower by the window, an evil-eye charm, and a walnut desk with a
book of Rumi’s poetry in the drawer. There was no telephone, no television, no clock, and no electricity. I didn’t mind. Having lived in
squat houses for years, I couldn’t see why I shouldn’t survive in a dervish lodge.
On my first evening, Master Sameed came to my room to check on me. He said I was more than welcome to stay with them until
ready to leave for Mecca. But there was one condition: no drugs!
I remember feeling my face burn, like a child caught with his hand in the cookie jar. How did they know? Had they been rummaging
through my suitcase while I was out? I’ll never forget what the master said next: “We don’t need to look through your belongings to
know you are using drugs, Brother Craig. You have the eyes of an addict.”
And the funny thing is, Ella, until that day I had never thought of myself as an addict. I was so sure that I was in control and that
drugs helped me with my problems. “Numbing the pain is not the same as healing it,” Master Sameed said. “When the anesthesia wears
off, the pain is still there.”
I knew he was right. With conceited determination I handed them all the drugs I carried with me, even my sleeping pills. But soon it
became apparent that my determination was not strong enough to pull me through what was to come. During the four months I stayed
in that small lodge, I broke my promise and strayed badly on more than a dozen occasions. For one who chose intoxication over
sobriety, it wasn’t hard to find drugs, even as a foreigner. One night I came to the lodge dead drunk and found all the doors bolted from
inside. I had to sleep in the garden. The next day Master Sameed asked nothing, and I offered no apologies.
Apart from these shaming incidents, I managed to get along fine with the Sufis, enjoying the calm that settled on the lodge in the
evenings. Being there felt peculiar but oddly peaceful, and though I was no stranger to living under the same roof with many people, I
found something there I had never experienced before: inner peace.
On the surface we lived a collective life where everyone ate, drank, and performed the same activities at the same time, but
underneath we were expected and encouraged to remain alone and look within. On the Sufi path, first you discover the art of being
alone amid the crowd. Next you discover the crowd within your solitude—the voices inside you.
While I waited for the Sufis in Morocco to safely sneak me into Mecca and Medina, I read extensively on Sufi philosophy and
poetry, at first out of boredom and lack of anything better to do, then with growing interest. Like a man who had not realized how thirsty
he was until he took his first sip of water, I found that my encounter with Sufism made me yearn for more. Of all the books I read that
long summer, it was the collected poems of Rumi that had the most impact on me.
Three months later, out of the blue, Master Sameed said I reminded him of someone—a wandering dervish by the name of Shams
of Tabriz. He said that some people regarded Shams as a brazen heretic, but if you asked Rumi, he was the moon and the sun.
I was intrigued. But it was more than simple curiosity. As I listened to Master Sameed tell me more about Shams, I felt a shiver
down my spine, an odd feeling of déjà vu.
Now, you are going to think I’m crazy. But I swear to God, at that moment I heard a rustle of silk in the background, first far off,
then drawing nearer, and I saw the shadow of someone who wasn’t there. Perhaps it was the evening breeze moving across the
branches, or maybe it was a pair of angel wings. Either way, I suddenly knew that I didn’t need to go anywhere. Not anymore. I was
sick and tired of always longing to be somewhere else, somewhere beyond, always in a rush despite myself.
I was already where I wanted to be. All I needed was to stay and look within. This new part of my life I call my encounter with the
letter f in the word “Sufi.”
Love,
Aziz
Shams
KONYA, FEBRUARY 1246
Bidding fair to be an eventful day, the morning proceeded faster than usual, and the sky hung low and
gray. Late in the afternoon, I found Rumi in his room sitting by the window, his forehead creased in
contemplation, his fingers moving restlessly over rosary beads. The room was dim on account of the
heavy velvet curtains being half closed, and there was a strange wedge of daylight that fell upon the spot
where Rumi sat, giving the whole scene a dreamy quality. I couldn’t help but wonder whether Rumi
would see the real intention behind what I was about to ask him to do, or would he be shocked and upset?
As I stood there absorbing the serenity of the moment, but also feeling slightly nervous, I had a glimpse
of a vision. I saw Rumi, a much older and frailer version of himself, clad in a dark green robe and sitting
in exactly the same spot, looking more compassionate and generous than ever, but with a permanent scar
on his heart in the shape of me. I understood two things at once: That Rumi would spend his old age here
in this house. And that the wound left by my absence would never heal. Tears pricked in my eyes.
“Are you all right? You look pale,” said Rumi.
I forced myself to smile, but the burden of what I was planning to say next weighed heavily on my
shoulders. My voice came out a bit cranky and less forceful than I intended. “Not really. I am very thirsty,
and there is nothing in this house to quench my thirst.”
“Would you like me to ask Kerra what she can do about it?” Rumi asked.
“No, because what I need is not in the kitchen. It is in the tavern. I am in the mood to get drunk, you
see.”
I pretended not to notice the shadow of incomprehension that crossed Rumi’s face, and I continued.
“Instead of going to the kitchen for water, would you go to the tavern for wine?”
“You mean, you want me to get you wine?” Rumi asked, pronouncing the last word cautiously, as if
afraid of breaking it.
“That’s right. I’d so much appreciate it if you would get us some wine. Two bottles would be enough,
one for you, one for me. But do me a favor, please. When you go to the tavern, don’t just simply get the
bottles and come back. Stay there for a while. Talk to the people. I’ll be waiting here for you. No need to
rush.”
Rumi gave me a look that was half irritated, half bewildered. I recalled the face of the novice in
Baghdad who had wanted to accompany me but cared too much about his reputation to take the plunge.
His concern for the opinions of others had held him back. Now I wondered if his reputation was going to
hold Rumi back, too.
But to my great relief, Rumi stood up and nodded.
“I have never been to a tavern before and have never consumed wine. I don’t think drinking is the right
thing to do. But I trust you fully, because I trust the love between us. There must be a reason you have
asked me to do such a thing. I need to find out what that reason is. I’ll go and bring us wine.”
With that, he said good-bye and walked out.
As soon as he was out of the room, I fell to the ground in a state of profound ecstasy. Grabbing the
amber rosary Rumi had left behind, I thanked God over and over again for giving me a true companion
and prayed that his beautiful soul would never sober up from the drunkenness of Divine Love.
PART FOUR
Fire
THE THINGS THAT DAMAGE, DEVASTATE, AND DESTROY
Suleiman the Drunk
KONYA, FEBRUARY 1246
Beguiled by wine, I have had many crazy delusions when drunk, but seeing the great Rumi enter the tavern
door was really wild, even for me. I pinched myself, but the vision didn’t vanish.
“Hey, Hristos, what did you serve me, man?” I yelled. “That last bottle of wine must have been some
mighty booze. You’d never guess what I’m hallucinating right now.”
“Hush, you idiot,” whispered someone from behind me.
I looked around to see who was trying to quiet me and was stunned to find every man in the tavern,
including Hristos, gawking at the door. The whole place had plunged into an eerie silence, and even the
tavern dog, Saqui, seemed perplexed as he lay with his floppy ears glued to the floor. The Persian rug
merchant stopped singing those awful melodies he called songs. Instead he swayed on his feet, holding his
chin up with the overstated seriousness of a drunk who was trying to appear to be otherwise.
It was Hristos who broke the silence. “Welcome to my tavern, Mawlana,” he said, his voice dripping
with politeness. “It is an honor to see you under this roof. How may I help you?”
I blinked repeatedly as it finally dawned on me that it really was Rumi standing there.
“Thank you,” Rumi said with a large but flat smile. “I’d like to get some wine.”
Poor Hristos was so surprised to hear this that his jaw dropped. When he could move again, he ushered
Rumi to the first available table, which happened to be next to mine!
“Selamun aleykum,” Rumi greeted me as soon as he sat down.
I greeted him back and uttered a few pleasantries, but I am not sure the words came out right. With his
tranquil expression, expensive robe, and elegant dark brown caftan, Rumi looked totally out of place.
I leaned forward and, dropping my voice to a whisper, said, “Would it be terribly rude if I ask what a
man like you is doing here?”
“I’m going through a Sufi trial,” Rumi said, winking at me as if we were best friends. “I’ve been sent
here by Shams so that I could have my reputation ruined.”
“And is that a good thing?” I asked.
Rumi laughed. “Well, it depends on how you look at it. Sometimes it is necessary to destroy all
attachments in order to win over your ego. If we are too attached to our family, our position in society,
even our local school or mosque, to the extent that they stand in the way of Union with God, we need to
tear those attachments down.”
I wasn’t sure I was following him correctly, but somehow this explanation made perfect sense to my
addled mind. I had always suspected that these Sufis were a crazy, colorful bunch capable of all kinds of
eccentricities.
Now it was Rumi’s turn to lean forward and ask in the same whispery tone, “Would it be terribly rude
if I asked you how you got that scar on your face?”
“It’s not a very interesting story, I’m afraid,” I said. “I was walking home late at night, and I bumped
into this security guard who beat the crap out of me.”
“But why?” asked Rumi, looking genuinely concerned.
“Because I had drunk wine,” I said, pointing to the bottle that Hristos had just placed in front of Rumi.
Rumi shook his head. At first he seemed entirely befuddled, as if he didn’t believe that such things
could happen, but soon his lips twisted into a friendly smile. And just like that, we continued to talk. Over
bread and goat cheese, we conversed about faith and friendship and other things in life that I thought I had
long forgotten but was now delighted to rake up from my heart.
Shortly after sunset Rumi rose to leave. Everyone in the tavern stood to bid him farewell. It was quite a
scene.
“You cannot leave without telling us why wine has been forbidden,” I said.
Hristos ran to my side with a frown, worried that my question might annoy his prestigious customer.
“Hush, Suleiman. Why do you have to ask such things?”
“No, seriously,” I insisted, staring at Rumi. “You have seen us. We are not evil people, but that is what
they say about us all the time. You tell me, what is so wrong with drinking wine, provided we behave
ourselves and don’t harm anyone?”
Despite an open window in the corner, the air inside the tavern had become musty and smoky, and
suffused with anticipation. I could see that everyone was curious to hear the answer. Pensive, kind, sober,
Rumi walked toward me, and here is what he said:
“If the wine drinker
Has a deep gentleness in him,
He will show that,
When drunk.
But if he has hidden anger and arrogance,
Those appear,
And since most people do,
Wine is forbidden to everyone.”
There was a brief lull as we all contemplated these words.
“My friends, wine is not an innocent drink,” Rumi addressed us in a renewed voice, so commanding
and yet so composed and solid, “because it brings out the worst in us. I believe it is better for us to
abstain from drinking. That said, we cannot blame alcohol for what we are responsible for. It is our own
arrogance and anger that we should be working on. That is more urgent. At the end of the day whoever
wants to drink will drink and whoever wants to stay away from wine will stay away. We have no right to
impose our ways on others. There is no compulsion in religion.”
This elicited heartened nods from some customers. I, for my part, preferred to raise my glass in my
belief that no piece of wisdom should go untoasted.
“You are a good man with a great heart,” I said. “No matter what people say about what you did today,
and I’m sure they are going to say plenty, I think as a preacher it was very brave of you to come to the
tavern and talk with us without judgment.”
Rumi gave me a friendly look. Then he grabbed the wine bottles he had left untouched and walked out
into the evening breeze.
Aladdin
KONYA, FEBRUARY 1246
Besieged with anticipation, for the last three weeks I have been waiting to find the right moment to ask my
father for Kimya’s hand in marriage. I have spent many hours talking to him in my imagination, rephrasing
the same sentences over and over, searching for a better way of expressing myself. I had an answer ready
for every possible objection he could come up with. If he said that Kimya and I were like sister and
brother, I would remind him that we were not bound by blood. Knowing how much my father loved
Kimya, I was also planning to say that if he let us get married, she would not have to go and live
anywhere else and could stay with us all her life. I had everything worked out in my mind, except I
couldn’t find a moment alone with my father.
But then this evening I ran into him in the worst way possible. I was about to leave the house to meet
with my friends when the door creaked open and in walked my father holding a bottle in each hand.
I stood still, agape. “Father, what is it that you are carrying?” I asked.
“Oh, that!” my father responded without the slightest trace of embarrassment. “It’s wine, my son.”
“Is that so?” I exclaimed. “Is this what has become of the great Mawlana? An old man blasted on
wine?”
“Watch your tongue,” came a sulky voice from behind me.
It was Shams. Staring into my face without so much as a blink, he said, “That is no way to talk to your
father. I’m the one who asked him to go to the tavern.”
“Why am I not surprised?” I couldn’t help smirking.
If Shams was offended by my words, he didn’t show it. “Aladdin, we can talk about this,” he said
flatly. “That is, if you don’t let your anger blur your vision.”
Then he cocked his head to one side and told me I had to soften my heart.
“It’s one of the rules,” he said. “If you want to strengthen your faith, you will need to soften inside.
For your faith to be rock solid, your heart needs to be as soft as a feather. Through an illness,
accident, loss, or fright, one way or another, we all are faced with incidents that teach us how to
become less selfish and judgmental, and more compassionate and generous. Yet some of us learn the
lesson and manage to become milder, while some others end up becoming even harsher than before.
The only way to get closer to Truth is to expand your heart so that it will encompass all humanity and
still have room for more Love.”
“You stay out of this,” I said. “I’m not taking orders from drunken dervishes. Unlike my father, that is.”
“Aladdin, shame on you,” my father broke in.
I felt an instant and potent pang of guilt, but it was too late. So many resentments I thought I had left
behind came flooding back to me.
“I have no doubt you hate me as much as you say you do,” Shams proclaimed, “but I don’t think you
have stopped loving your father even for a minute. Don’t you see you are hurting him?”
“Don’t you see you are ruining our lives?” I shot back.
That was when my father lunged forward, his mouth set in a grim line, his right hand raised above his
head. I thought he was going to slap me, but when he didn’t, when he wouldn’t, I felt even more uneasy.
“You shame me,” my father said without looking at my face.
My eyes welled with tears. I turned my head aside and suddenly came face-to-face with Kimya. How
long had she been standing there watching us from a corner with fearful eyes? How much of this squabble
had she heard?
The shame of being humiliated by my father in front of the girl I wanted to marry churned in my
stomach, leaving a bad taste in my mouth. It felt like the room was spinning all around me, threatening to
collapse.
Unable to stay there a moment longer, I grabbed my coat, pushed Shams aside, and dashed out of the
house, away from Kimya, away from all of them.
Shams
KONYA, FEBRUARY 1246
Bottles of wine stood between us, loaded with the smells of hot earth, wild herbs, and dark berries. After
Aladdin was gone, Rumi was so sad he couldn’t talk for a while. He and I stepped out into the snowcovered
courtyard. It was one of those bleak February evenings when the air felt heavy with a peculiar
stillness. We stood there watching the clouds move, listening to a world that offered us nothing but
silence. The wind brought us a whiff of the forests from afar, fragrant and musky, and for a moment I
believe we both wanted to leave this town for good.
Then I took one of the bottles of wine. I knelt beside a climbing rose tree that stood thorny and bare in
the snow, and I started to pour the wine on the soil beneath it. Rumi’s face brightened as he smiled his
half-thoughtful, half-excited smile.
Slowly, stunningly, the bare rose tree came alive, its bark softening like human skin. It produced a
single rose in front of our eyes. As I kept pouring the wine under the tree, the rose revealed a lovely warm
shade of orange.
Next I took the second bottle and poured it in the same way. The rose’s orangey color turned into a
bright crimson tone, glowing with life. Now there remained only a glassful of wine at the bottom of the
bottle. I poured that into a glass, drank half of it, and the remaining half I offered to Rumi.
He took the glass with trembling hands, responding to my gesture with a beaming reciprocity of
kindness and equanimity, this man who had never touched alcohol in his life.
“Religious rules and prohibitions are important,” he said. “But they should not be turned into
unquestionable taboos. It is with such awareness that I drink the wine you offer me today, believing with
all my heart that there is a sobriety beyond the drunkenness of love.”
Just as Rumi was about to take the glass to his lips, I snatched it back and flung it to the ground. The
wine spilled on the snow, like drops of blood.
“Don’t drink it,” I said, no longer feeling the need to continue with this trial.
“If you weren’t going to ask me to drink this wine, why did you send me to the tavern in the first
place?” Rumi asked, his tone not so much curious as compassionate.
“You know why,” I said, smiling. “Spiritual growth is about the totality of our consciousness, not about
obsessing over particular aspects. Rule Number Thirty-two: Nothing should stand between yourself and
God. Not imams, priests, rabbis, or any other custodians of moral or religious leadership. Not
spiritual masters, not even your faith. Believe in your values and your rules, but never lord them over
others. If you keep breaking other people’s hearts, whatever religious duty you perform is no good.
“Stay away from all sorts of idolatry, for they will blur your vision. Let God and only God be your
guide. Learn the Truth, my friend, but be careful not to make a fetish out of your truths.”
I had always admired Rumi’s personality and known that his compassion, endless and extraordinary,
was what I lacked in life. But today my admiration for him had grown by leaps and bounds.
This world was full of people obsessed with wealth, recognition, or power. The more signs of success
they earned, the more they seemed to be in need of them. Greedy and covetous, they rendered worldly
possessions their qibla, always looking in that direction, unaware of becoming the servants of the things
they hungered after. That was a common pattern. It happened all the time. But it was rare, as rare as
rubies, for a man who had already made his way up, a man who had plenty of gold, fame, and authority, to
renounce his position all of a sudden one day and endanger his reputation for an inner journey, one that
nobody could tell where or how it would end. Rumi was that rare ruby.
“God wants us to be modest and unpretentious,” I said.
“And He wants to be known,” Rumi added softly. “He wants us to know Him with every fiber of our
being. That is why it is better to be watchful and sober than to be drunk and dizzy.”
I agreed. Until it turned dark and cold, we sat in the courtyard with a single red rose between us. There
was, beneath the chill of the evening, the scent of something fresh and sweet. The Wine of Love made our
heads spin gently, and I realized with glee and gratitude that the wind no longer whispered despair.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, JUNE 24, 2008
“Baby, there’s a new Thai place in town,” David said. “They say it’s good. Why don’t we go there
tonight? Just the two of us.”
The last thing Ella wanted to do on this Tuesday was go out for dinner with her husband. But David
was so insistent that she couldn’t say no.
The Silver Moon was a small restaurant with stylish lamps, leather booths, black napkins, and so many
mirrors hung low on every wall that the customers felt as if they were dining with their own reflections. It
didn’t take Ella long to feel out of place there. But it wasn’t the restaurant that had made her feel this way.
It was her husband. She had glimpsed in David’s eyes an unusual glitter. Something wasn’t normal. He
looked pensive—worried, even. What disturbed her most was that he had stuttered a few times. Ella
knew that for his childhood speech impediment to surface, David had to be very distressed.
A young waitress dressed in a traditional outfit came to take their orders. David asked for chili basil
scallops, and Ella decided on the vegetables and tofu in coconut sauce, staying true to her fortiethbirthday
decision to refrain from eating meat. They also ordered wine.
They talked about the sophisticated decor for a few minutes, discussing the effect of black napkins
versus white napkins. Then there was silence. Twenty years of marriage, twenty years of sleeping in the
same bed, sharing the same shower, eating the same food, raising three kids … and what it all added up to
was silence. Or so Ella thought.
“I see you’ve been reading Rumi,” David remarked.
Ella nodded, though with some surprise. She didn’t know what surprised her more: to hear that David
knew about Rumi or that he cared about what she read.
“I started reading his poetry to help me to write my report on Sweet Blasphemy, but then I became
interested in it, and now I’m reading it for myself,” Ella said by way of explanation.
David grew distracted by a wine stain on the tablecloth, then sighed with a valedictory expression on
his face. “Ella, I know what’s going on,” he said. “I know everything.”
“What are you talking about?” Ella asked, although she wasn’t sure she wanted to hear the answer.
“About … about your affair …” David stammered. “I’m aware of it.”
Ella looked at her husband, flabbergasted. In the glow of the candle that the waitress had just lit for
them, David’s face showed pure despair.
“My affair?!” Ella blurted out, quicker and louder than she intended. She instantly noticed the couple at
the next table turning in their direction. Embarrassed, she dropped her voice to a whisper and repeated,
“What affair?”
“I’m not stupid,” David said. “I checked your e-mail account and read your messages with that man.”
“You did what?” Ella exclaimed.
Ignoring the question, his face contorted with the weight of what he was about to announce, David said,
“I don’t blame you, Ella. I deserve it. I neglected you, and you looked for compassion elsewhere.”
Ella lowered her gaze to her glass. The wine had a charming color—a deep, dark ruby. For a second
she thought she glimpsed specks of iridescent sparkle on its surface, like a trail of lights guiding her. And
perhaps there was a trail. It all felt surreal.
Now David paused, deciding how best, or whether, to reveal what he had in mind. “I’m ready to
forgive you and leave this behind,” he finally remarked.
There were many things Ella wanted to say at that moment, poignant and mocking, tense and dramatic,
but she chose the easiest one. With gleaming eyes, she asked, “What about your affairs? Are you also
going to leave them behind?”
The waitress arrived then with their orders. Ella and David sat back and watched her leave the plates
on the table and refill the glasses with exaggerated politeness. When she finally left, David flicked his
eyes up toward Ella and asked, “So is this what this was about? Was it for revenge?”
“No,” Ella said, shaking her head in disappointment. “This is not about revenge. It never was.”
“Then what is it about?”
Ella clasped her hands, feeling as if everything and everyone in the restaurant—the customers, the
waiters, the cooks, and even the tropical fish in the fish tank—had stopped to hear what she was going to
say.
“It is about love,” she said at last. “I love Aziz.”
Ella expected her husband to roll with laughter. But when she finally found the courage to look him in
the eye, there was only horror on his face, quickly replaced by the expression of someone who was trying
to solve a problem with minimal damage. Suddenly she had a moment of knowing. “Love” was a serious
word, loaded and quite unusual, for her—a woman who had said so many negative things about love in
the past.
“We have three kids,” David said, his voice trailing off.
“Yes, and I love them very much,” Ella said with a slump in her shoulders. “But I also love Aziz—”
“Stop using that word,” David interjected. He took a big gulp from his glass before he spoke again. “I
made major mistakes, but I never stopped loving you, Ella. And I have never loved anyone else. We can
both learn from our mistakes. For my part I can promise you that the same thing won’t happen again. You
don’t need to go out and look for love anymore.”
“I didn’t go out and seek love,” Ella muttered, more to herself than to him. “Rumi says we don’t need to
hunt for love outside ourselves. All we need to do is to eliminate the barriers inside that keep us away
from love.”
“Oh, my God! What’s come over you? This isn’t you! Stop being so romantic, will you? Come back to
your old self,” David snapped, then added, “Please!”
Ella furrowed her brow and inspected her nails as if there were something about them troubling her. In
truth, she’d remembered another moment in time when she herself had said virtually the same words to
her daughter. She felt as if a circle had been completed. Nodding her head slowly, she put her napkin
aside.
“Can we please go now?” she said. “I’m not hungry.”
That night they slept in separate beds. And early in the morning, the first thing Ella did was write a
letter to Aziz.
The Zealot
KONYA, FEBRUARY 1246
“Batten down the hatches! Sheikh Yassin! Sheikh Yassin! Did you hear the scandal?” Abdullah, the father
of one of my students, exclaimed as he approached me on the street. “Rumi was seen in a tavern in the
Jewish quarter yesterday!”
“Yes, I heard about that,” I said, “but I wasn’t surprised. The man has a Christian wife, and his best
friend is a heretic. What did you expect?”
Abdullah nodded gravely. “I guess you are right. We should have seen it coming.”
A number of passersby gathered around us, overhearing our conversation. Somebody suggested that
Rumi should not be allowed to preach in the Great Mosque anymore. Not until he apologized publicly. I
agreed. Being late for my class in the madrassa, I then left them to their talk and hurried off.
I had always suspected that Rumi had a dark side ready to float up to the surface someday. But even I
hadn’t expected him to take to the bottle. It was utterly disgusting. People say Shams is the primary reason
for the downfall of Rumi, and if he weren’t around, Rumi would go back to normal. But I hold a different
view. Not that I doubt that Shams is an evil man—he is—or that he doesn’t have a bad influence on Rumi
—he does—but the question is, why can’t Shams lead other scholars astray, such as me? At the end of the
day, those two are alike in more ways than people are willing to recognize.
There are people who heard Shams remark, “A scholar lives on the marks of a pen. A Sufi loves and
lives on footprints!” Now, what does that mean? Apparently Shams thinks scholars talk the talk and Sufis
walk the walk. But Rumi, too, is a scholar, isn’t he? Or does he not consider himself one of us anymore?
Should Shams enter my classroom, I would chase him away like a fly, never giving him the opportunity
to sputter gibberish in my presence. Why can’t Rumi do the same? There must be something wrong with
him. The man has a Christian wife, for starters. I don’t care if she has converted to Islam. It is in her
blood and in the blood of her child. Unfortunately, the townspeople don’t take the threat of Christianity as
seriously as they should, and they assume that we can live side by side. To those who are naïve enough to
believe that, I always say, “Can water and oil ever mix? That is the extent to which Muslims and
Christians can!”
Having a Christian for a wife and being notoriously soft toward minorities, Rumi was already an
undependable man in my eyes, but when Shams of Tabriz started living under his roof, he totally deviated
from the right path. As I tell my students every day, one needs to be alert against Sheitan. And Shams is
the devil incarnate. I am sure it was his idea to send Rumi to the tavern. God knows how he convinced
him. But isn’t beguiling righteous people into sacrilege what Sheitan excels at?
I understood Shams’s evil side right from the start. How dare he compare the Prophet Muhammad, may
peace be upon him, with that irreligious Sufi Bistami? Wasn’t it Bistami who pronounced, “Look at me!
How great is my glory!” Wasn’t it he who then said, “I saw the Kaaba walking around me”? The man
went as far as stating, “I am the smith of my own self.” If this is not blasphemy, then what is? Such is the
level of the man Shams quotes with respect. For just like Bistami, he, too, is a heretic.
The only good news is that the townspeople are waking up to the truth. Finally! Shams’s critics
increase with each passing day. And the things they say! Even I am appalled sometimes. In the bathhouses
and teahouses, in the wheat fields and orchards, people tear him apart.
I reached the madrassa later than usual, my mind heavy with these thoughts. As soon as I opened the door
to my classroom, I sensed there was something unusual. My students were sitting in a perfect line, pale
and oddly silent, as if they had all seen a ghost.
Then I understood why. Sitting there by the open window with his back resting against the wall, his
hairless face lit with an arrogant smile, was none other than Shams of Tabriz.
“Selamun aleykum, Sheikh Yassin,” he said, staring hard at me across the room.
I hesitated, not knowing whether to greet him, and decided not to. Instead I turned to my students and
inquired, “What is this man doing here? Why did you let him in?”
Dazed and uneasy, none of the students dared to answer. It was Shams himself who shattered the
silence.
His tone insolent, his gaze unwavering, he said to me, “Don’t scold them, Sheikh Yassin. It was my
idea. You see, I was in the neighborhood and said to myself, ‘Why don’t I stop by the madrassa and visit
the one person in this town who hates me most?’ ”
Husam the Student
KONYA, FEBRUARY 1246
Bright-eyed and bushy-tailed, we were all sitting on the floor in the classroom when the door opened and
in walked Shams of Tabriz. Everyone was stunned. Having heard so many bad and bizarre things about
him, mostly from our teacher, I, too, couldn’t help but cringe upon seeing him in our classroom in the
flesh. He, however, seemed relaxed and friendly. After greeting us all, he said he had come to have a
word with Sheikh Yassin.
“Our teacher doesn’t like to have strangers in the classroom. Perhaps you should talk to him some other
time,” I said, hoping to avoid a nasty encounter.
“Thanks for your concern, young man, but sometimes nasty encounters are not only inevitable, they are
necessary,” Shams answered, as if he had read my thoughts. “Don’t you worry, though. It won’t take too
long.”
Irshad, sitting next to me, muttered between clenched teeth, “Look at his nerve! He is the devil
incarnate.”
I nodded, though I wasn’t sure Shams looked like the devil to me. Set against him as I was, I couldn’t
help liking his forthrightness and audacity.
A few minutes later, Sheikh Yassin entered through the door, his brow furrowed in contemplation. He
had taken no more than a few steps inside when he stopped and blinked distractedly in the direction of the
uninvited visitor.
“What is this man doing here? Why did you let him in?”
My friends and I exchanged shocked glances and frightened whispers, but before anyone could muster
the courage to say anything, Shams blurted out that he had been in the neighborhood and had decided to
visit the one person in Konya who hated him most!
I heard several students cough tautly and saw Irshad draw in a sharp breath. The tension between the
two men was so thick that the air in the classroom could be cut with a knife.
“I don’t know what you are doing here, but I have better things to do than talk to you,” Sheikh Yassin
reprimanded. “Now, why don’t you take your leave, so that we can get on with our studies?”
“You say you won’t talk to me, but you have been talking about me,” Shams remarked. “You have
constantly spoken ill of me and Rumi, and of all the mystics along the Sufi path.”
Sheikh Yassin sniffed through his big, bony nose and narrowed his mouth to a pout, as if he had
something sour on his tongue. “As I said, I have nothing to talk with you about. I already know what I need
to know. I have my opinions.”
Shams now turned to us with a swift, sardonic glance. “A man with many opinions but no questions!
There’s something so wrong with that.”
“Really?” Sheikh Yassin looked amused and animated. “Then why don’t we ask the students which of
the two they’d rather be: the wise man who knows the answers or the perplexed man who has nothing but
questions?”
All of my friends sided with Sheikh Yassin, but I sensed that many did so less out of sincere agreement
than to get favors from the teacher. I chose to remain silent.
“One who thinks he has all the answers is the most ignorant,” Shams said with a dismissive shrug, and
turned to our teacher. “But since you are so good with answers, may I ask you a question?”
That was when I started to worry about where this conversation was heading. But there was nothing I
could do to prevent the escalating tension.
“Since you claim I am the devil’s servant, could you kindly tell us what exactly your notion of Sheitan
is?” asked Shams.
“Certainly,” Sheikh Yassin said, never missing an opportunity to preach. “Our religion, which is the
last and the best of Abrahamic religions, tells us it was Sheitan who caused Adam and Eve to be expelled
from heaven. As the children of fallen parents, we all need to be alert, because Sheitan comes in many
forms. Sometimes he comes in the form of a gambler who invites us to gamble, sometimes a beautiful
young woman who tries to seduce us.… Sheitan can come in the least expected forms, like that of a
wandering dervish.”
As if expecting this remark, Shams smiled knowingly. “I see what you mean. It must be a huge relief,
and an easy way out, to think the devil is always outside of us.”
“What do you mean?” Sheikh Yassin asked.
“Well, if Sheitan is as wicked and indomitable as you are saying he is, then we human beings have no
reason to blame ourselves for our wrongdoings. Whatever good happens we’ll attribute to God, and all
the bad things in life we’ll simply attribute to Sheitan. In either case we’ll be exempt from all criticism
and self-examination. How easy that is!”
Still talking, Shams started to pace the room, his voice rising with each word. “But let’s for one
moment imagine there is no Sheitan. No demons waiting to burn us in scorching cauldrons. All these
bloodcurdling images were designed to show us something, but then they became clichés and lost their
original message.”
“And what might that message be?” Sheikh Yassin asked wearily, crossing his arms on his chest.
“Ah, so you do have questions after all,” Shams said. “The message is that the torment a person can
inflict upon himself is endless. Hell is inside us, and so is heaven. The Qur’an says human beings are the
most dignified. We are higher than the highest, but also lower than the lowest. If we could grasp the full
meaning of this, we would stop looking for Sheitan outside and instead focus on ourselves. What we need
is sincere self-examination. Not being on the watch for the faults of others.”
“You go and examine yourself, and inshallah someday you will redeem yourself,” Sheikh Yassin
answered, “but a proper scholar has to keep an eye on his community.”
“Then allow me to tell you a story,” Shams said, with such graciousness that we couldn’t be sure
whether he was sincere or mocking.
And here is what he told us:
Four merchants were praying in a mosque when they saw the muezzin enter. The first merchant
stopped his prayer and asked, “Muezzin! Has the prayer been called? Or do we still have time?”
The second merchant stopped praying and turned to his friend. “Hey, you spoke while you were
praying. Your prayer is now void. You need to start anew!”
Upon hearing this, the third merchant interjected, “Why do you blame him, you idiot? You should
have minded your own prayer. Now yours is void, too.”
The fourth merchant broke into a smile and said loudly, “Look at them! All three have messed up.
Thank God I’m not one of the misguided.”
After telling this story, Shams stood facing the classroom and asked, “So what do you think? Which of
the merchants’ prayers, in your opinion, were invalid?”
There was a brief stirring in the classroom as we discussed the answer among ourselves. Finally
someone at the back said, “The second, the third, and the fourth merchants’ prayers were void. But the
first merchant is innocent, because all he wanted was to consult the muezzin.”
“Yes, but he shouldn’t have abandoned his prayer like that,” Irshad interposed. “It is obvious that all
the merchants were wrong, except the fourth one, who was just talking to himself.”
I averted my gaze, disagreeing with both answers but determined to keep my mouth shut. I had a feeling
my views might not be welcome.
But no sooner had this thought crossed my mind than Shams of Tabriz pointed at me and asked, “And
you over there! What do you think?”
I swallowed hard before I could find my voice. “If these merchants made a mistake, it is not because
they spoke during prayer,” I said, “but because instead of minding their own business and connecting with
God, they were more interested in what was going on around them. However, if we pass judgment on
them, I am afraid we’ll be making the same crucial mistake.”
“So what is your answer?” Sheikh Yassin asked, suddenly interested in the conversation.
“My answer is, all four merchants have erred for a similar reason, and yet none of them can be said to
be in the wrong, because at the end of the day, it is not up to us to judge them.”
Shams of Tabriz took a step toward me and looked at me with such affection and kindness that I felt
like a little boy savoring the unconditional love of a parent. He asked my name, and when I told him, he
remarked, “Your friend Husam here has a Sufi heart.”
I blushed up to my ears when I heard this. There was no doubt I would be scolded by Sheikh Yassin
after the class and mocked and ridiculed by my friends. But all my worries quickly evaporated. I sat
straight and smiled at Shams. He gave me a wink in return and, still smiling, continued to explain.
“The Sufi says, ‘I should mind my inner encounter with God rather than judging other people.’ An
orthodox scholar, however, is always on the lookout for the mistakes of others. But don’t forget, students,
most of the time he who complains about others is himself at fault.”
“Stop confusing the minds of my students!” Sheikh Yassin broke in. “As scholars we cannot afford to
be disinterested in what others are doing. People ask us many questions and expect to be answered duly,
so that they can live their religion fully and properly. They ask us if their ablutions need to be redone
should their noses bleed or if it is okay to fast while traveling and so on. The Shafi, Hanefi, Hanbali, and
Maliki teachings differ from one another when it comes to these matters. Each school of law has its own
set of meticulous answers that must be studied and learned.”
“That’s good, but don’t get so attached to nominal distinctions.” Shams sighed. “The logos of God is
complete. Don’t reach for details at the expense of the whole.”
“Details?” Sheikh Yassin echoed incredulously. “Believers take rules seriously. And we scholars
guide them in their endeavor.”
“Keep guiding—that is, as long as you don’t forget that your guidance is limited and there is no word
above the word of God,” Shams said, and then he added, “But try not to preach to those who have attained
enlightenment. They derive a different pleasure in the verses of the Qur’an and so do not require the
guidance of a sheikh.”
Upon hearing this, Sheikh Yassin got so furious that his withered cheeks flushed waves of crimson and
his Adam’s apple jutted out sharply. “There is nothing temporary in the guidance we provide,” he said.
“The sharia constitutes the rules and regulations that every Muslim should consult from cradle to grave.”
“The sharia is only a boat that sails in the ocean of Truth. The true seeker of God will sooner or later
abandon the vessel and plunge into the sea.”
“So that sharks might eat him up,” Sheikh Yassin retorted, chuckling. “That’s what happens to the one
who refuses to be guided.”
A few students joined in the chuckle, but the rest of us sat quietly, feeling increasingly uncomfortable.
The class was coming to an end, and I couldn’t see how this conversation could conclude on a positive
note.
Shams of Tabriz must have felt the same gloom, for he looked pensive now, almost forlorn. He closed
his eyes as if suddenly tired of so much talk, a move so subtle as to be almost imperceptible.
“In all my travels, I have come to know many sheikhs,” Shams said. “While some were sincere men,
others were condescending, and they didn’t know anything about Islam. I wouldn’t trade the dust off of the
old shoes of a real lover of God for the heads of today’s sheikhs. Even shadow players who display
images behind curtains are better than they are, because at least they admit that what they provide is mere
illusion.”
“That’s enough! I think we’ve heard enough of your forked tongue,” Sheikh Yassin announced. “Now,
get out of my classroom!”
“Don’t worry, I was about to leave,” Shams said roguishly, and then he turned toward us. “What you
witnessed here today is an old debate that extends back to the time of the Prophet Muhammad, may peace
be upon him,” he remarked. “But the debate is not only germane to the history of Islam. It is present in the
heart of every Abrahamic religion. This is the conflict between the scholar and the mystic, between the
mind and the heart. You take your pick!”
Shams paused briefly to let us feel the full impact of his words. I felt his stare fall upon me, and it was
almost like sharing a secret—entrance into an untold, unwritten brotherhood.
Then he added, “In the end, neither your teacher nor I can know more than God allows us to know. We
all play our parts. Only one thing matters, though. That the light of the sun isn’t overshadowed by the
blindness of the eye of the denier, the one who refuses to see.”
With that, Shams of Tabriz placed his right hand on his heart and bade farewell to us all, including
Sheikh Yassin, who stood aside, grim and unresponsive. The dervish walked out and shut the door behind
him, leaving us swathed in a silence so profound that we could not talk or fidget for a long while.
It was Irshad who pulled me out of my trance. I noticed he was staring at me with something akin to
disapproval. Only then did I realize that my right hand was resting on my heart in salute to a Truth that it
had recognized.
Baybars the Warrior
KONYA, MAY 1246
Bloody but unbowed. I couldn’t believe my ears when I heard that Shams had found the nerve to confront
my uncle in front of his students. Doesn’t this man have any decency? How I wished I had been in the
madrassa when he arrived. I would have kicked him out before he even had the chance to open that
wicked mouth of his. But I wasn’t there, and it seems that he and my uncle had a long conversation, which
the students have been blabbering about ever since. I take their words with a grain of salt, though, since
their accounts are inconsistent and give too much credit to that rotten dervish.
I feel very nervous tonight. It is all because of that harlot Desert Rose. I can’t rid my mind of her. She
reminds me of jewelry boxes with secret compartments. You think you own her, but unless you have the
keys, she remains locked up and unreachable even when you hold her in your arms.
It is her surrendering that troubles me most. I keep asking myself why she didn’t resist my fits. How
come she just lay there on the floor under my feet, listless as a dirty old rug? Had she hit me back or
screamed for help, I would have stopped hitting her. But she lay motionless, her eyes bulging, her mouth
shut, as if determined to take it on the chin, come what may. Did she really not care at all whether I killed
her?
I have been trying hard not to go to the brothel again, but today I gave in to the need to see her. On the
way there, I kept wondering how she would react upon seeing me. In case she complained about me and
things got nasty, I was going to bribe or threaten that fat patron of hers. I had everything worked out in my
mind and was ready for every possibility, except for the possibility of her having run away.
“What do you mean, Desert Rose is not here?” I burst out. “Where is she?”
“Forget about that harlot,” the patron said, popping a lokum into her mouth and sucking the syrup off of
her finger. Seeing how upset I was, she added in a softer voice, “Why don’t you take a look at the other
girls, Baybars?”
“I don’t want your cheap whores, you fat hag. I need to see Desert Rose, and I need to see her now.”
The hermaphrodite raised her dark, pointed eyebrows at this form of address but didn’t dare to argue
with me. Her voice dwindled to a whisper, as if ashamed of what she was about to say. “She is gone.
Apparently she ran away while everyone was sleeping.”
It was too absurd to be even laughable. “Since when do whores walk out of their brothels?” I asked.
“You find her now!”
The patron looked at me as if she were seeing, really seeing me, for the first time. “Who are you to give
me orders?” she hissed, as her small, defiant eyes, so unlike those of Desert Rose, blazed back at me.
“I am a security guard who has an uncle in high places. I can shut this den down and put you all out on
the street,” I said as I reached over to the bowl on her lap and plucked out a lokum. It was soft and chewy.
I wiped my sticky fingers on the patron’s silk scarf. Her face became livid with rage, but she did not
dare to pick a fight.
“Why are you blaming me?” she said. “Blame that dervish. He is the one who convinced Desert Rose
to leave the brothel and find God.”
For a moment I couldn’t understand who she was talking about, but then it dawned upon me it was no
other than Shams of Tabriz that she meant.
First disrespecting my uncle in front of his students, and now this. Clearly that heretic didn’t know his
boundaries.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, JUNE 26, 2008
Beloved Aziz,
I decided to write you a letter this time. You know, the old-fashioned way, with ink, a perfumed paper, a matching envelope, and a
stamp. I am going to mail it to Amsterdam this afternoon. I need to do this right away because if I delay in mailing my letter, I am afraid
I will never be able to do it.
First you meet someone—someone who is completely different from everyone around you. Someone who sees everything in a
different light and forces you to shift, change your angle of vision, observe everything anew, within and without. You think you can keep
a safe distance from him. You think you can navigate your way through this beautiful storm until you realize, much too suddenly, you
are thrust out into the open and in fact you control nothing.
I cannot tell when exactly I became captivated by your words. All I know is, our correspondence has been changing me. Right from
the start. Chances are I will regret saying this. But having spent my whole life regretting the things I failed to do, I see no harm in doing
something regrettable for a change.
Ever since I “met” you through your novel and your e-mails, you have dominated my thoughts. Every time I read an e-mail from
you, I feel something inside me swirl and realize that I have not known such contentment and excitement in a long while. Throughout
the day you are on my mind all the time. I talk to you silently, wondering how you would respond to every new stimulus in my life.
When I go to a nice restaurant, I want to go there with you. When I see anything of interest, I am saddened by not being able to show it
to you. The other day my younger daughter asked me if I had done something with my hair. My hair is the same as always! But it’s
true that I look different, because I feel different.
Then I remind myself that we haven’t even met yet. And that brings me back to reality. And the reality is that I don’t know what to
do with you. I have finished reading your novel and turned in my report. (Oh, yes, I was writing an editorial report on it. There were
times when I wanted to share my views with you, or at least send you the report I gave the literary agent, but I thought that wouldn’t be
right. Although I can’t share with you the details of my report, you should know that I absolutely loved your book. Thank you for the
pleasure. Your words willstay with me always.)
Anyway, Sweet Blasphemy has nothing to do with my decision to write this letter, or perhaps it has everything to do with it. What
has compelled me is this thing between us, whatever it is, and its overwhelming impact upon me is eluding my control. It has become
more serious than I can handle. I first loved your imagination and your stories, and then I realized I love the man behind the stories.
Now I don’t know what to do with you.
As I said, I need to send this letter immediately. If not, I will have to tear it into a dozen bits. I will act as if there is nothing new in
my life, nothing unusual.
Yes, I could do what I always do and pretend that everything is normal.
I could pretend if it weren’t for this sweet ache in my heart …
With love,
Ella
Kerra
KONYA, MAY 1246
Baptism of fire. I don’t know how to deal with this situation. This morning, out of nowhere, a woman
came asking for Shams of Tabriz. I told her to come back later, as he wasn’t at home, but she said she had
nowhere to go and would rather wait in the courtyard. That was when I got suspicious and started to
inquire into who she was and where she came from. She fell to her knees and opened her veil, showing a
face scarred and swollen from many beatings. Despite her bruises and cuts, she was very pretty and so
lithe. Amid tears and sobs, and in a surprisingly articulate way, she confirmed what I had already
suspected. She was a harlot from the brothel.
“But I have abandoned that awful place,” she said. “I went to the public bath and washed myself forty
times with forty prayers. I took an oath to stay away from men. From now on, my life is dedicated to
God.”
Not knowing what to say, I stared into her wounded eyes and wondered how she, young and fragile as
she was, had found the courage to abandon the only life she knew. I didn’t want to see a fallen woman
anywhere near my house, but there was something about her that broke my heart, a kind of simplicity,
almost innocence, I had never seen in anyone before. Her brown eyes reminded me of Mother Mary’s
eyes. I couldn’t bring myself to shoo her away. I let her wait in the courtyard. That was the most I could
do. She sat there by the wall, staring into space as motionless as a marble statue.
An hour later, when Shams and Rumi returned from their walk, I rushed to tell them about the
unexpected visitor.
“Did you say there was a harlot in our courtyard?” Rumi asked, sounding puzzled.
“Yes, and she says she has left the brothel to find God.”
“Oh, that must be Desert Rose,” Shams exclaimed, his tone not so much surprised as pleased. “Why did
you keep her outside? Bring her in!”
“But what will our neighbors say if they learn we have a harlot under our roof?” I objected, my voice
cracking with the tension.
“Aren’t we all living under the same roof anyhow?” Shams said, pointing to the sky above. “Kings and
beggars, virgins and harlots, all are under the same sky!”
How could I argue with Shams? He always had a ready answer for everything.
I ushered the harlot into the house, praying that the inquisitive eyes of the neighbors would not fall upon
us. No sooner had Desert Rose entered the room than she ran to kiss the hands of Shams, sobbing.
“I am so glad you are here.” Shams beamed as if talking to an old friend. “You won’t go back to that
place ever again. That stage of your life is completely over. May God make your journey toward Truth a
fruitful one!”
Desert Rose commenced to cry harder. “But the patron will never leave me in peace. She will send
Jackal Head after me. You don’t know how—”
“Clear your mind, child,” Shams interrupted. “Remember another rule: While everyone in this world
strives to get somewhere and become someone, only to leave it all behind after death, you aim for the
supreme stage of nothingness. Live this life as light and empty as the number zero. We are no different
from a pot. It is not the decorations outside but the emptiness inside that holds us straight. Just like
that, it is not what we aspire to achieve but the consciousness of nothingness that keeps us going.”
Late in the evening, I showed Desert Rose the bed where she would sleep. And when she fell asleep
immediately, I returned to the main room, where I found Rumi and Shams talking.
“You should come to our performance,” Shams said when he saw me coming.
“What performance?” I asked.
“A spiritual dance, Kerra, the likes of which you have never seen.”
I looked at my husband in astonishment. What was going on? What dance were they talking about?
“Mawlana, you are a respected scholar, not an entertainer. What will people think of you?” I asked,
feeling my face growing hot.
“Don’t you worry,” Rumi said. “Shams and I have been talking about this for a long time. We want to
introduce the dance of the whirling dervishes. It is called the sema. Whoever yearns for Divine Love is
more than welcome to join us.”
My head started to ache madly, but the pain was slight compared to the torment in my heart.
“What if people don’t like it? Not everyone thinks highly of dance,” I said to Shams, hoping this would
have the effect of stopping whatever he was about to say next. “At least consider postponing this
performance.”
“Not everyone thinks highly of God,” Shams said without missing a beat. “Are we going to postpone
believing in Him, too?”
And that was the end of the argument. There were no more words to exchange, and the sound of the
wind filled the house, bursting through the slats in the walls and pounding in my ears.
Sultan Walad
KONYA, JUNE 1246
“Beauty is in the eye of the beholder,” Shams kept saying. “Everybody will watch the same dance, but
each will see it differently. So why worry? Some will like it, some won’t.”
Yet on the evening of the sema, I told Shams I was worried that nobody would show up.
“Don’t worry,” he said forcefully. “The townspeople might not like me, they might not even be fond of
your father anymore, but they cannot possibly ignore us. Their curiosity will bring them here.”
And just so, on the evening of the performance, I found the open-air hall packed. There were merchants,
blacksmiths, carpenters, peasants, stonecutters, dye makers, medicine vendors, guild masters, clerks,
potters, bakers, mourners, soothsayers, rat catchers, perfume sellers—even Sheikh Yassin had come with
a group of students. Women were sitting in the rear.
I was relieved to see the sovereign Kaykhusraw sitting with his advisers in the front row. That a man of
such a high rank supported my father would keep tongues quiet.
It took a long time for the members of the audience to settle down, and even after they had, the noise
inside didn’t fully subside and there remained a murmur of heated gossip. In my itch to sit next to someone
who would not speak ill of Shams, I sat next to Suleiman the Drunk. The man reeked of wine, but I didn’t
mind.
My legs were jumpy, my palms sweaty, and though the air was warm enough for us to take off our
cloaks, my teeth chattered. This performance was so important for my father’s declining reputation. I
prayed to God, but since I didn’t know what exactly to ask for, other than things turning out all right, my
prayer sounded too lame.
Shortly there came a sound, first from far away, and then it drew nearer. It was so captivating and
moving that all held their breath, listening.
“What kind of an instrument is this?” Suleiman whispered with a mixture of awe and delight.
“It is called the ney,” I said, remembering a conversation between my father and Shams. “And its sound
is the sigh of the lover for the beloved.”
When the ney abated, my father appeared onstage. With measured, soft steps, he approached and
greeted the audience. Six dervishes followed him, all my father’s disciples, all wearing long white
garments with large skirts. They crossed their hands on their chests, bowing in front of my father to get his
blessing. Then the music started, and, one by one, the dervishes began to spin, first slowly, then with
breathtaking speed, their skirts opening up like lotus flowers.
It was quite a scene. I couldn’t help but smile with pride and joy. Out of the corner of my eye, I checked
the reaction of the audience. Even the nastiest gossipers were watching the performance with visible
admiration.
The dervishes whirled and whirled for what seemed like an eternity. Then the music rose, the sound of
a rebab from behind a curtain catching up with the ney and the drums. And that was when Shams of
Tabriz entered the stage, like the wild desert wind. Wearing a darker robe than everyone else and looking
taller, he was also spinning faster. His hands were wide open toward the sky, as was his face, like a
sunflower in search of the sun.
I heard many people in the audience gasp with awe. Even those who hated Shams of Tabriz seemed to
have fallen under the spell of the moment. I glanced at my father. While Shams spun in a frenzy and the
disciples whirled more slowly in their orbits, my father remained as still as an old oak tree, wise and
calm, his lips constantly moving in prayer.
Finally the music slowed down. All at once the dervishes stopped whirling, each lotus flower closing
up into itself. With a tender salute, my father blessed everyone onstage and in the audience, and for a
moment it was as if we were all connected in perfect harmony. A thick, sudden silence ensued. Nobody
knew how to react. Nobody had seen anything like this before.
My father’s voice pierced the silence. “This, my friends, is called the sema—the dance of the whirling
dervishes. From this day on, dervishes of every age will dance the sema. One hand pointed up to the sky,
the other hand pointing down to earth, every speck of love we receive from God, we pledge to distribute
to the people.”
The audience smiled and mumbled in agreement. There was a warm, friendly commotion all over the
hall. I was so touched by seeing this affirming response that tears welled up in my eyes. At long last my
father and Shams were beginning to receive the respect and love that they most certainly deserved.
The evening could have ended on that warm note and I could have gone home a happy man, feeling
confident that things were improving, had it not been for what happened next, ruining everything.
Suleiman the Drunk
KONYA, JUNE 1246
Blood and thunder! What an unforgettable evening! I still have not recovered from its effects. And of all
the things that I have witnessed tonight, the most startling was the finale.
After the sema, the great Kaykhusraw II stood up, his eyes ranging round the room imperiously. In
consummate smugness he approached the stage, and after giving a great whoop of laughter, he said,
“Congratulations, dervishes! I was impressed by your performance.”
Rumi gracefully thanked him, and all the dervishes onstage did the same. Then the musicians stood up
together and greeted the sovereign with ultimate respect. His face brimming with satisfaction,
Kaykhusraw signaled to one of his guards, who immediately handed him a velvet pouch. Kaykhusraw
bounced the pouch in his palm several times to show how heavy it was with golden coins and then flung it
onto the stage. People around me sighed and applauded. So deeply were we moved by the generosity of
our ruler.
Content and confident, Kaykhusraw turned to leave. But no sooner had he taken a step toward the exit
than the very pouch he’d flung on the stage was tossed back at him. The coins landed under his feet,
jingling like a new bride’s bracelets. Everything had happened so fast that for a full minute we all stood
still and perplexed, unable to make sense of what was going on. But no doubt the one who was most
shocked was Kaykhusraw himself. The insult was so obvious and definitely too personal to be forgivable.
He looked over his shoulder with unbelieving eyes to see who could have done such a horrible thing.
It was Shams of Tabriz. All heads turned toward him as he stood onstage arms akimbo, his eyes wild
and bloodshot.
“We don’t dance for money,” he boomed in a deep voice. “The sema is a spiritual dance performed for
love and love alone. So take back your gold, sovereign! Your money is no good here!”
A dreadful silence descended upon the hall. Rumi’s elder son looked so shaken that all the blood had
been drained from his young face. Nobody dared to make a sound. Without a sigh, without a gasp, we all
held our breaths. As if the skies had been waiting for this signal, it started to rain, sharp and stinging. The
raindrops drowned everything and everyone in their steady sound.
“Let’s go!” Kaykhusraw yelled to his men.
His cheeks wobbling with humiliation, his lips quivering uncontrollably, and his shoulders visibly
slumped, the sovereign headed for the exit. His many guards and servants scurried behind him one by one,
stomping on the spilled coins on the floor with their heavy boots. People rushed to scoop up the coins,
pushing and pulling one another.
As soon as the sovereign had left, a murmur of disapproval and disappointment rippled through the
audience.
“Who does he think he is!” some people burst out.
“How dare he insult our ruler?” others joined in. “What if Kaykhusraw makes the whole town pay the
price now?”
A group of people stood up, shaking their heads in disbelief, and stalked toward the exit in a clear sign
of protest. At the head of the protesters were Sheikh Yassin and his students. To my great surprise, I
noticed among them two of Rumi’s old disciples—and his own son Aladdin.
Aladdin
KONYA, JUNE 1246
By Allah, I had never been so embarrassed in my life. As if it weren’t shameful enough to see my own
father in cahoots with a heretic, I had to suffer the mortification of watching him lead a dance
performance. How could he disgrace himself like that in front of the whole town? On top of this, I was
utterly appalled when I heard there was among the audience a harlot from the brothel. As I sat there
wondering how much more madness and destruction my father’s love for Shams could cause us all, for the
first time in my life I wished to be the son of another man.
To me the entire performance was sheer sacrilege. But what happened afterward was far beyond the
pale. How could that insolent man find the nerve to pour scorn on our ruler? He is very lucky that
Kaykhusraw didn’t have him arrested on the spot and sent to the gallows.
When I saw Sheikh Yassin walk out after Kaykhusraw, I knew I had to do the same. The last thing I
wanted was for the townspeople to think that I was on the side of a heretic. Everyone had to see once and
for all that, unlike my brother, I wasn’t my father’s puppet.
That night I didn’t go home. I stayed at Irshad’s house with a few friends. Overcome with emotion, we
talked about the day’s events and discussed at great length what to do.
“That man is a terrible influence on your father,” said Irshad tautly. “And now he has brought a
prostitute into your house. You need to clean your family’s name, Aladdin.”
As I stood listening to the things they said, my face burning with a scalding shame, one thing was clear
to me: Shams had brought us nothing but misery.
In unison we reached the conclusion that Shams had to leave this town—if not willingly, then by force.
The next day I went back home determined to talk to Shams of Tabriz man to man. I found him alone in the
courtyard, playing the ney, his head bowed, his eyes closed, his back turned to me. Fully immersed in his
music, he hadn’t noticed my presence. I approached as quiet as a mouse, taking the opportunity to observe
him and get to know my enemy better.
After what seemed like several minutes, the music stopped. Shams raised his head slightly, and without
looking in my direction, he mumbled flatly, as if talking to himself, “Hey there, Aladdin, were you looking
for me?”
I didn’t say a word. Knowing of his ability to see through closed doors, it didn’t surprise me that he
had eyes in the back of his head.
“So did you enjoy the performance yesterday?” Shams asked, now turning his face toward mine.
“I thought it was disgraceful,” I answered at once. “Let’s get something straight, shall we? I don’t like
you. I never have. And I’m not going to let you ruin my father’s reputation any more than you have
already.”
A spark flickered in his eyes as Shams put his ney aside and said, “Is that what this is about? If Rumi’s
reputation is ruined, people won’t look up to you as the son of an eminent man anymore. Does that scare
you?”
Determined not to let him get under my skin, I ignored his mordant remarks. Still, it was a while before
I could say anything.
“Why don’t you go and leave us in peace? We were so good before you came,” I shot back. “My father
is a respected scholar and a family man. You two have nothing in common.”
His neck craned forward, his brow furrowed in mighty concentration, Shams drew in a deep breath.
Suddenly he looked old and vulnerable. It flashed through my mind that I could slug him, beat him to a
pulp, before anyone could run to his rescue. The thought was so dreadful and malevolent, and yet
frighteningly seducing, that I had to avert my eyes.
When I stared back at him, I found Shams inspecting me, his gaze avid, bright. Could he be reading my
mind? A creepy feeling got hold of me, spreading from my hands to my feet, as if I were being pricked by
a thousand needles, and my knees felt wobbly, unwilling to carry me. It must have been black magic. I had
no doubt that Shams excelled in the darkest forms of sorcery.
“You are scared of me, Aladdin,” Shams said after a pause. “You know who you remind me of? The
cross-eyed assistant!”
“What are you talking about?” I said.
“It’s a story. Do you like stories?”
I shrugged. “I have no time for them.”
A flicker of condescension crossed Shams’s lips. “A man who has no time for stories is a man who has
no time for God,” he said. “Don’t you know that God is the best storyteller?”
And without waiting for me to say anything, he told me this story:
Once there was an artisan who had a bitter assistant, who was cross-eyed to boot. This assistant
always saw double. One day the artisan asked him to bring a jar of honey from storage. The assistant
came back empty-handed. “But, Master, there are two jars of honey there,” he complained. “Which
one do you want me to bring?” Knowing his assistant too well, the artisan said, “Why don’t you break
one of the jars and bring me the other one?”
Alas, the assistant was too shallow to understand the wisdom behind these words. He did as told. He
broke one of the jars and was very surprised to see the other one break, too.
“What are you trying to tell me?” I asked. To display my temper in front of Shams was a mistake, but I
couldn’t help it. “You and your stories! Damn it! Can’t you ever talk straight?”
“But it is so clear, Aladdin. I am telling you that like the cross-eyed assistant you see dualities
everywhere,” Shams said. “Your father and I are one. If you break me, you’ll break him as well.”
“You and my father have nothing in common,” I riposted. “If I break the second jar, I’ll set the first one
free.”
I was so full of rage and resentment that I didn’t consider the ramifications of my words. Not then. Not
until much later.
Not until it was too late.
Shams
KONYA, JUNE 1246
By and large, the narrow-minded say that dancing is sacrilege. They think God gave us music—not only
the music we make with our voices and instruments but the music underlying all forms of life, and then He
forbade our listening to it. Don’t they see that all nature is singing? Everything in this universe moves with
a rhythm—the pumping of the heart, the flaps of a bird’s wings, the wind on a stormy night, a blacksmith
working iron, or the sounds an unborn baby is surrounded with inside the womb.… Everything partakes,
passionately and spontaneously, in one magnificent melody. The dance of the whirling dervishes is a link
in that perpetual chain. Just as a drop of seawater carries within it the entire ocean, our dance both
reflects and shrouds the secrets of the cosmos.
Hours before the performance, Rumi and I retreated into a quiet room to meditate. The six dervishes
who were going to whirl in the evening joined us. Together we performed our ablutions and prayed. Then
we donned our costumes. Earlier we had talked at great length about what the proper attire should be and
had chosen simple fabric and colors of the earth. The honey-colored hat symbolized the tombstone, the
long white skirt the shroud, and the black cloak the grave. Our dance projected how Sufis discard the
entire Self, like shedding a piece of old skin.
Before leaving the hall for the stage, Rumi recited a poem:
“The gnostic has escaped from the five senses
And the six directions and makes you aware of what is beyond them.”
With those feelings we were ready. First came the sound of the ney. Then Rumi entered the stage in his
capacity as semazenbashi. One by one, the dervishes followed him, their heads bowed in modesty. The
last to appear had to be the sheikh. As firmly as I resisted the suggestion, Rumi insisted on my performing
that part tonight.
The hafiz chanted a verse from the Qur’an: There are certainly Signs on earth for people with
certainty; and in yourselves as well. Do you not see?
Then started the kudüm accompanying the piercing sound of ney and rebab.
Listen to the reed and the tale it tells,
how it sings of separation:
Ever since they cut me from the reed bed,
my wail has caused men and women to weep.
Giving himself over to the hands of God, the first dervish started to whirl, the hems of his skirts gently
swishing with a separate life of their own. We all joined in and whirled until there remained around us
nothing but Oneness. Whatever we received from the skies, we passed on to the earth, from God to
people. Each and every one of us became a link connecting the Lover to the Beloved. When the music
ceased, we jointly bowed to the essential forces of the universe: fire, wind, earth, and water, and the fifth
element, the void.
I don’t regret what transpired between me and Kaykhusraw at the end of the performance. But I am sorry
for putting Rumi in a difficult position. As a man who has always enjoyed privilege and protection, he has
never before felt estranged from a ruler. Now he has at least a smattering of insight into something that
average people experience all the time—the deep, vast rift between the ruling elite and the masses.
And with that, I suppose I am nearing the end of my time in Konya.
Every true love and friendship is a story of unexpected transformation. If we are the same person
before and after we loved, that means we haven’t loved enough.
With the initiation of poetry, music, and dance, a huge part of Rumi’s transformation is complete. Once
a rigid scholar who disliked poetry and a preacher who enjoyed the sound of his own voice as he lectured
others, Rumi is now turning into a poet himself, becoming the voice of pure emptiness, though he might not
have realized this fully yet. As for me, I, too, have changed and am changing. I am moving from being into
nothingness. From one season to another, one stage to the next, from life to death.
Our friendship was a blessing, a gift from God. We thrived, rejoiced, bloomed, and basked in each
other’s company, savoring absolute fullness and felicity.
I remembered what Baba Zaman once told me. For the silk to prosper, the silkworm had to die. Sitting
there all alone in the whirling hall after everyone had left and the hubbub had died away, I knew that my
time with Rumi was coming to an end. Through our companionship Rumi and I had experienced an
exceptional beauty and learned what it was like to encounter infinity through two mirrors reflecting each
other endlessly. But the old maxim still applies: Where there is love, there is bound to be heartache.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, JUNE 29, 2008
Beyond wildest dreams, Aziz said, strange things happened to people when they were ready for the
unusual and the unexpected. But not a single bone in Ella’s body was ready for the one strange thing that
happened this week: Aziz Z. Zahara came to Boston to see her.
It was Sunday evening. The Rubinsteins had just sat down to eat when Ella noticed a text message on
her cell phone. Assuming that it must be from someone at the Fusion Cooking Club, she didn’t hurry to
check it. Instead she served the evening’s specialty: honey-roasted duck with sautéed potatoes and
caramelized onions on a bed of brown rice. When she placed the duck on the table, everyone perked up.
Even Jeannette, who was depressed after seeing Scott with his new girlfriend and realizing she still loved
him, seemed ravenous.
It was a long, languid dinner, peppered with good wine and the usual talk. Ella was privy to every
conversation at the table. With her husband she discussed having the gazebo repainted a bright blue, with
Jeannette she chatted about her busy schedule at college, and with the twins she talked about renting some
new DVDs, including the latest Pirates of the Caribbean. Only after she had placed the dirty dishes in the
dishwasher and served the white chocolate crème brûlée did it occur to her to check the message on her
cell phone.
Hi, Ella, I’m in Boston on an assignment for Smithsonian magazine. Just got off the plane. Would you like to meet? I’m staying at the
Onyx and would love to see you, Aziz
Ella put the phone away and took her place at the dinner table for dessert, feeling slightly dizzy.
“You got a message?” David asked, raising his head from his plate.
“Yes, it’s from Michelle,” Ella answered without a moment’s hesitation.
Turning his anguished face away, David dabbed his mouth and then, with amazing slowness and
precision, folded his napkin into a perfect square. “I see,” he said when he was done.
Ella knew that her husband didn’t believe her, not in the least, and yet she also felt she had to stick with
her story, not to convince her husband or deceive her children but for herself, to make it possible for her
to take that one step from her house to Aziz’s hotel. So she continued, measuring each word. “She called
to tell me there’s going to be a meeting tomorrow morning at the agency to discuss next year’s catalog.
She wants me to join them.”
“Well, you should go, then,” said David with a flicker in his eyes that indicated he, too, was in on the
game. “Why don’t I give you a ride in the morning, and we could go there together? I could reschedule a
few appointments.”
Ella stared at her husband, aghast. What was he trying to do? Did he want to make a scene in front of
the kids?
“That’d be lovely,” she said, forcing herself to smile. “But we’re going to need to leave the house
before seven A.M. Michelle says she wants to talk to me in private before the others join in.”
“Oh, forget it, then,” Orly chimed in, knowing how much her father detested waking up early. “Daddy
could never get up in time!”
Now Ella and David looked at each other, locking into a level gaze over the heads of their children,
each waiting for the other one to make the first move.
“That’s true,” David conceded finally.
Ella nodded with relief, though she felt a slight flush of shame at her audacity, because at that moment
she had another idea, a bolder one.
“Yes, it is awfully early. In fact,” she said, “why don’t I go now?”
The thought of going to Boston tomorrow morning and having breakfast with Aziz was enough to make
her heart beat faster. Yet she wanted to see Aziz right away, now rather than tomorrow, which all of a
sudden felt too far away. It was almost a two-hour drive from her house to Boston, but she didn’t mind.
He had come all the way from Amsterdam for her. She could certainly drive two hours.
“I could be in Boston before ten tonight. And tomorrow I could be at the agency early enough to see
Michelle before the meeting.”
A shadow of agony crossed David’s face. It seemed an eternity before he could say anything. In that
long moment, his eyes were the eyes of a man who had neither the strength nor the emotion left in him to
stop his wife from going to another man.
“I can drive to Boston tonight, and stay in our apartment,” Ella said, seemingly to her children but in
truth only to David. That was her way of assuring her husband there would be no physical contact
between her and whomever he assumed she was going to meet.
David rose from his chair with a glass of wine in his hand. Giving a sweeping gesture in the direction
of the door, he smiled at Ella with assurance and added, a bit too eagerly, “All right, honey, if that’s what
you want, you should go now.”
“But, Mom, I thought you were going to help me with math this evening,” Avi objected.
Ella felt her face burn. “I know, dear. Why don’t we do that tomorrow?”
“Oh, let her go.” Orly turned to her brother teasingly. “You don’t need your mama by your side all the
time. When are you going to grow up?”
Avi frowned but said nothing further, Orly was supportive, Jeannette didn’t care one way or the other,
and just like that, Ella grabbed her cell phone and dashed upstairs. As soon as she closed the bedroom
door, she threw herself onto the bed and text-messaged Aziz.
I can’t believe you’re here. I’ll be at the Onyx in two hours.
She stared at her phone in growing panic as she watched her message being sent. What was she doing?
But there was no time to think. If she was going to regret this evening, which she suspected she might, she
could regret it later. Now she needed to hurry. It took her twenty minutes to jump into the shower, blowdry
her hair, brush her teeth, choose a dress, take it off, try another dress, then another, comb her hair, put
on some makeup, look for the small earrings Grandma Ruth had given her on her eighteenth birthday, and
change her dress again.
Taking in a deep breath, she put on some perfume. Eternity by Calvin Klein. The bottle had been
waiting in the bathroom cabinet for ages. David had never been fond of perfume. He said women should
smell like women, not like vanilla beans or cinnamon sticks. But European men might have a different
take on this, Ella assumed. Wasn’t perfume a big thing in Europe?
When she was done, she inspected the woman in the mirror. Why hadn’t he told her he was coming? If
she’d known, she would have gone to a hairdresser, gotten a manicure, had a facial, and perhaps tried a
new hairstyle. What if Aziz didn’t like her? What if there was no chemistry between them and he regretted
coming all the way to Boston?
All at once she came to her senses. Why did she want to change her looks? What difference would it
make whether there was chemistry between them or not? Any adventure with this man was bound to be
ephemeral. She had a family. She had a life. Her past was here, and so was her future. Annoyed with
herself for indulging in such unlikely scenarios, she closed down her mind, which always proved easier.
At a quarter to eight, Ella kissed her children good night and left the house. David was nowhere to be
seen.
As she walked toward her car, jingling the keys to the apartment in Boston in her hand, her mind was
still numb, but her heart raced.
PART FIVE
The Void
THE THINGS THAT ARE PRESENT THROUGH THEIR ABSENCE
Sultan Walad
KONYA, JULY 1246
Breathing with difficulty and barely able to stand straight, my father came to my room, looking like a
shadow of the man he used to be. There were bags under his eyes, dark and ominous, as if he had stayed
awake all night. But what surprised me most was that his beard had gone white.
“My son, help me,” he said in a voice that didn’t sound like him.
I ran to him and grabbed his arm. “Anything, Father, just ask for it.”
He was silent for a minute, as though crushed under the weight of what he was going to say next.
“Shams is gone. He has left me.”
For the briefest of moments, I was awash with confusion and a strange sense of relief, but of that I said
nothing. Sad and shocked though I was, it also occurred to me that this could be for the best. Wouldn’t life
be easier and more tranquil now? My father had gained many enemies lately, all because of Shams. I
wanted things to get back to how they were before he came. Could Aladdin be right? Weren’t we all
better off without Shams?
“Don’t forget how much he means to me,” my father said as if he sensed my thoughts. “He and I are one.
The same moon has a bright and a dark side. Shams is my unruly side.”
I nodded, feeling ashamed. My heart sank. My father didn’t have to say more. I had never seen so much
suffering in a man’s eyes. My tongue felt heavy in my mouth. I couldn’t speak for a while.
“I want you to find Shams—that is, of course, if he wants to be found. Bring him back. Tell him how my
heart aches.” My father’s voice dropped to a whisper. “Tell him his absence is killing me.”
I promised him I would bring Shams back. His hand gripped mine and squeezed it with such gratitude
that I had to avert my gaze, for I didn’t want him to see the indecision in my eyes.
I spent the whole week roaming the streets of Konya, hoping to trace the footsteps of Shams. By this time
everyone in town had heard he had disappeared, and there was much speculation as to his whereabouts. I
met a leper who loved Shams immensely. He directed me to many desperate and unfortunate people
whom the wandering dervish had helped. I never knew there were so many who loved Shams, since they
were the kind of people who had been invisible to me till now.
One evening I came home feeling tired and disoriented. Kerra brought me a bowl of rice pudding,
fragrant with the essence of roses. She sat down next to me and watched me eat, her smile framed by
crescents of anguish. I couldn’t help noticing how much she had aged this past year.
“I heard you were trying to bring Shams back. Do you know where he has gone?” she asked.
“There are rumors he might have gone to Damascus. But I also heard people say he headed to Isfahan,
Cairo, or even Tabriz, the city of his birth. We need to check them all. I’ll go to Damascus. Some of my
father’s disciples will go to the other three cities.”
A solemn expression crossed Kerra’s face, and she murmured, as though thinking aloud, “Mawlana is
writing verses. They are beautiful. Shams’s absence is turning him into a poet.”
Dropping her gaze to the Persian carpet, her cheeks moist, her round mouth pouting, Kerra sighed, and
then she recited the following:
“I have seen the king with a face of Glory
He who is the eye and the sun of heaven”
There was something in the air now that wasn’t there a moment ago. I could see that Kerra was torn deep
inside. One had only to look at her face to understand how it pained her to watch her husband suffer. She
was ready to do anything in her power just to see him smile again. And yet she was equally relieved,
almost glad, to have finally gotten rid of Shams.
“What if I cannot find him?” I heard myself ask.
“Then there won’t be much to do. We will continue with our lives as before,” she remarked, a sparkle
of hope flickering in her eyes.
At that moment I understood in all clarity and beyond doubt what she insinuated. I didn’t have to find
Shams of Tabriz. I didn’t even have to go to Damascus. I could leave Konya tomorrow, wander for a
while, find myself a nice roadside inn to stay at, and come back a few weeks later, pretending to have
looked for Shams everywhere. My father would trust my word, and the subject would be dropped forever.
Perhaps that would be best, not only for Kerra and Aladdin, who had always been suspicious of Shams,
but also for my father’s students and disciples, and even for me.
“Kerra,” I said, “what shall I do?”
And this woman who had converted to Islam to marry my father, who had been a wonderful mother to
me and my brother, and who loved her husband so much she memorized the poems he wrote for someone
else, gave me a pained look and said nothing. Suddenly she had no more words inside her.
I had to find the answer for myself.
Rumi
KONYA, AUGUST 1246
Barren is the world, devoid of sun, since Shams is gone. This city is a sad, cold place, and my soul is
empty. I can’t sleep at night, and during the day I only wander around. I am here and I am not here—a
ghost among people. I can’t help feeling cross at everyone. How can they go on living their lives as if
nothing has changed? How can life be the same without Shams of Tabriz?
Every day from dusk to dawn, I sit in the library on my own and think of nothing but Shams. I remember
what he, with a touch of harshness in his voice, had once told me: “Someday you will be the voice of
love.”
I don’t know about that, but it is true that I find silence painful these days. Words give me openings to
break through the darkness in my heart. This was what Shams had wanted all along, wasn’t it? To make a
poet out of me!
Life is about perfection. Every incident that happens, no matter how colossal or small, and every
hardship that we endure is an aspect of a divine plan that works to that end. Struggle is intrinsic to being
human. That is why it says in the Qur’an, Certainly we will show Our ways to those who struggle on Our
way. There is no such thing as coincidence in God’s scheme. And it was no coincidence that Shams of
Tabriz crossed my path on that day in October almost two years ago.
“I didn’t come to you because of the wind,” Shams had said.
And then he had told me a story.
Once there was a Sufi master who was so knowledgeable that he had been given the breath of Jesus.
He had only one student, and he was quite happy with what he was given. But his disciple was of a
different mind. In his desire to see everyone else marvel at the powers of his master, he kept begging
him to take on more followers.
“All right,” the master finally agreed. “If it will make you happy, I’ll do as you say.”
They went to the market that day. In one of the stalls, there were bird-shaped candies. As soon as
the master blew upon them, the birds came alive and flew away with the wind. Speechless, the
townspeople immediately gathered around him with admiration. From that day on, everyone in town
was singing the master’s praises. Soon there were so many followers and admirers around him that his
old disciple couldn’t see him much anymore.
“Oh, Master, I was wrong. It was much better in the old days,” the disciple moaned forlornly. “Do
something. Make them all go away, please.”
“All right. If it will make you happy, I’ll shoo them away.”
The next day while he was preaching, the master broke wind. His followers were appalled. One by
one, they turned and walked away from him. Only his old disciple remained.
“Why didn’t you leave with the others?” the master asked.
And the disciple answered, “I didn’t come to you because of the first wind, nor would I leave you
because of the last.”
Everything Shams did, he did for my perfection. This is what the townspeople could never understand.
Shams deliberately fanned the flames of gossip, touched raw nerves, and spoke words that sounded like
blasphemy to ordinary ears, shocking and provoking people, even those who loved him. He threw my
books into water, forcing me to unlearn all that I knew. Though everyone had heard that he was critical of
sheikhs and scholars, very few people knew how capable of tafsir he was. Shams had deep knowledge in
alchemy, astrology, astronomy, theology, philosophy, and logic, but he kept his knowledge hidden from
ignorant eyes. Though he was a faqih, he acted as if he were a faqir.
He opened our doors to a prostitute and made us share our food with her. He sent me to the tavern and
encouraged me to talk to drunks. Once he made me beg across from the mosque where I used to preach,
forcing me to put myself in the shoes of a leper beggar. He cut me off first from my admirers, then from the
ruling elite, bringing me in touch with the common people. Thanks to him I came to know persons I would
have otherwise never met. In his belief that all idols that stood between the individual and God had to be
demolished, including fame, wealth, rank, and even religion, Shams cut loose all the moorings that tied me
to life as I knew it. Wherever he saw any kind of mental boundary, a prejudice or a taboo, he took the bull
by the horns and confronted it.
For him I went through trial and tests, states and stages, each of which made me look more deranged in
the eyes of even my most loyal followers. Before, I had plenty of admirers; now I have gotten rid of the
need for an audience. Blow after blow, Shams managed to ruin my reputation. Because of him I learned
the value of madness and have come to know the taste of loneliness, helplessness, slander, seclusion, and,
finally, heartbreak.
Whatever you see as profitable, flee from it!
Drink poison and pour away the water of life!
Abandon security and stay in frightful places!
Throw away reputation, become disgraced and shameless!
At the end of the day, aren’t we are all put on trial? Every day, every passing minute, God asks us, Do
you remember the covenant we made before you were sent to this world? Do you understand your role
in revealing My treasure?
Most of the time, we are not ready to answer these questions. They are too frightening. But God is
patient. He asks again and again.
And if this heartache, too, is part of a trial, my only wish is to find Shams at the end of it. My books,
sermons, family, wealth, or name—I am ready to give up anything and everything, just to see his face one
more time.
The other day Kerra said I was turning into a poet, almost despite myself. Though I have never thought
highly of poets, I wasn’t surprised to hear that. At any other time, I might have objected to what she said,
but not anymore.
My mouth is spewing out lines of poetry, constantly and involuntarily, and, listening to them, one might
conclude that I am becoming a poet indeed. The Sultan of Language! But the truth, insofar as I am able to
tell, is that the poems do not belong to me. I am only a vehicle for letters that are placed in my mouth. Like
a pen that writes down the words it is ordered to inscribe or a flute that plays the notes blown into it, I,
too, am simply doing my part.
Marvelous sun of Tabriz! Where are you?
Shams
DAMASCUS, APRIL 1247
By the time spring was in full swing in Damascus, and ten months had passed since my departure from
Konya, Sultan Walad found me. Under a clear blue sky, I was playing chess with a Christian hermit
named Francis. He was a man whose inner equilibrium did not tilt easily, a man who knew the meaning of
submission. And since Islam means the inner peace that comes from submission, to me Francis was more
Muslim than many who claim to be so. For it is one of the forty rules: Submission does not mean being
weak or passive. It leads to neither fatalism nor capitulation. Just the opposite. True power resides in
submission—a power that comes from within. Those who submit to the divine essence of life will live
in unperturbed tranquillity and peace even when the whole wide world goes through turbulence after
turbulence.
I moved my vizier in order to force Francis’s king to shift position. With a quick and brave decision, he
moved his rook. I had begun to suspect I was going to lose this game when I lifted my head and came eye
to eye with Sultan Walad.
“Nice to see you,” I said. “So you have decided to look for me after all.”
He gave me a rueful smile, then turned somber, surprised to hear that I was aware of the internal
struggle he had been through. But being the honest man that he was, he didn’t deny the truth.
“I spent some time wandering around instead of looking for you. But after a while I couldn’t do it
anymore. I couldn’t bring myself to lie to my father. I came to Damascus and started looking for you, but
you weren’t easy to find.”
“You are an honest man and a good son,” I said. “One day soon you’ll be a great companion to your
father.”
Sultan Walad shook his head dolefully. “You are the only companion he needs. I want you to come
back to Konya with me. My father needs you.”
Many things churned in my brain upon hearing this invitation, and none of them were clear at first. My
nafs reacted with fear at the idea of going back to a place where I was clearly unwelcome.
Don’t listen to him. You are done with your mission. You don’t have to return to Konya. Remember
what Baba Zaman told you. It’s way too dangerous. If you go back to that town you will never come
out again.
I wanted to keep traveling the world, meet new people and see new cities. I had liked Damascus, too,
and could easily stay there until the next winter. Traveling to a new place often engendered a dreadful
sense of loneliness and sadness in the soul of a man. But with God by my side, I was content and fulfilled
in my solitude.
Yet I knew too well that my heart was in Konya. I missed Rumi so much that it was too painful even to
utter his name. At the end of the day, what difference would it make which city I stayed in, as long as
Rumi was not beside me? Wherever he lived, there was my qibla.
I moved my king on the chessboard. Francis’s eyes flew open as he detected the fatal position. But in
chess, just as in life, there were moves that you made for the sake of winning and there were moves you
made because they were the right thing to do.
“Please come with me,” implored Sultan Walad, interrupting my thoughts. “The people who gossiped
about you and treated you badly are remorseful. Everything will be better this time, I promise.”
My boy, you can’t make such promises, I wanted to tell him. Nobody can!
But instead I nodded and said, “I would like to watch the sunset in Damascus one more time.
Tomorrow we can leave for Konya.”
“Really? Thank you!” Sultan Walad beamed with relief. “You don’t know how much this will mean to
my father.”
I then turned to Francis, who was patiently waiting for me to return to the game. When he had my full
attention, an impish smile crept along his mouth.
“Watch out, my friend,” he said, his voice triumphant. “Checkmate.”
Kimya
KONYA, MAY 1247
Bearing a mysterious gaze in his eyes and a distance in his demeanor that he’d never had before, Shams of
Tabriz came back into my life. He seems to have changed a lot. His hair long enough to fall into his eyes,
his skin tanned under the Damascus sun, he looks younger and more handsome. But there is something else
in him, a change I cannot quite put my finger on. As bright and reckless as ever his black eyes might be,
there is now a new glimmer to them. I can’t help suspecting he has the eyes of a man who has seen it all
and doesn’t want to struggle anymore.
But I think a deeper transformation has been taking place in Rumi. I had thought all his worries would
diminish when Shams came back, but that doesn’t seem to be the case. On the day Shams returned, Rumi
greeted him outside the city walls with flowers. But when the joy of the first days somewhat abated, Rumi
became even more anxious and withdrawn than before. I think I know the reason. Having lost Shams once,
he is afraid of losing him again. I can understand as no one else can, because I, too, am afraid of losing
him.
The only person I share my feelings with is Gevher, Rumi’s late wife. Well, she is not technically a
person, but I don’t call her a ghost either. Less dreamy and distant than most of the ghosts I have known,
she has been moving like a slow flow of water around me ever since I came to this house. Although we
converse about everything, lately there is only one topic between us: Shams.
“Rumi looks so distressed. I wish I could help him,” I said to Gevher today.
“Perhaps you could. There is something occupying his mind these days, but he hasn’t shared it with
anyone yet,” Gevher said mysteriously.
“What is it?” I inquired.
“Rumi thinks if Shams gets married and starts a family, the townspeople would be less set against him.
There would be less gossip, and Shams would not have to leave again.”
My heart skipped a beat. Shams getting married! But to whom?
Gevher gave me a sidelong look and said, “Rumi has been wondering if you would like to marry
Shams.”
I was stunned. Not that this was the first time the thought of marriage had crossed my mind. Now
fifteen, I knew I had reached the age to marry, but I also knew that girls who got married changed forever.
A new gaze came to their eyes, and they took on a new demeanor, to such an extent that people started to
treat them differently. Even little children could tell the difference between a married woman and an
unmarried one.
Gevher smiled tenderly and held my hand. She had noticed that it was the getting-married part that
worried me, not getting married to Shams.
The next day, in the afternoon, I went to see Rumi and found him immersed in a book titled Tahafut alTahafut.
“Tell me, Kimya,” he said lovingly, “what can I do for you?”
“When my father brought me to you, you had told him that a girl would not make as good a student as a
boy because she would have to marry and raise her children, do you remember that?”
“Of course, I remember,” he answered, his hazel eyes filled with curiosity.
“That day I promised myself never to get married, so that I could remain your student forever,” I said,
my voice dwindling under the weight of what I was planning to say next. “But perhaps it is possible to get
married and not have to leave this house. I mean, if I get married to someone who lives here …”
“Are you telling me you want to marry Aladdin?” Rumi asked.
“Aladdin?” I repeated in shock. But what made him think I wanted to marry Aladdin? He was like a
brother to me.
Rumi must have detected my surprise. “Some time ago Aladdin came to me and asked for your hand,”
he said.
I gasped. I knew it wasn’t proper for a girl to ask too many questions on such matters, but I was dying
to learn more. “And what did you say, Master?”
“I told him I would have to ask you first,” Rumi said.
“Master …” I said, my voice trailing off. “I came here to tell you I want to marry Shams of Tabriz.”
Rumi gave me a look that bordered on disbelief. “Are you sure about this?”
“It could be good in many ways,” I said, as inside me the need to say more wrestled with the regret of
having said too much. “Shams would be part of our family, and he wouldn’t ever have to leave again.”
“So is that why you want to marry him? To help him stay here?” asked Rumi.
“No,” I said. “I mean, yes, but that’s not all.… I believe Shams is my destiny.”
This was as close as I could get to confessing to anyone that I loved Shams of Tabriz.
The first to hear about the marriage was Kerra. In stunned silence she greeted the news with a broken
smile, but as soon as we were alone in the house, she started to ask me questions. “Are you sure this is
what you want to do? You are not doing this to help Rumi, are you?” she said. “You are so young! Don’t
you think you should marry someone closer to your own age?”
“Shams says in love all boundaries are blurred,” I told her.
Kerra sighed loudly. “My child, I wish things were that simple,” she remarked, tucking a lock of gray
hair into her scarf. “Shams is a wandering dervish, an unruly man. Men like him aren’t used to domestic
life, and they don’t make good husbands.”
“That’s all right, he can change,” I concluded firmly. “I will give him so much love and happiness he
will have to change. He will learn how to be a good husband and a good father.”
That was the end of our talk. Whatever it was that she saw on my face, Kerra had no more objections to
raise.
I slept peacefully that night, feeling exultant and determined. Little did I know that I was making the
most common and the most painful mistake women have made all throughout the ages: to naïvely think that
with their love they can change the men they love.
Kerra
KONYA, MAY 1247
Broaching a subject as deep and delicate as love is like trying to capture a gusty wind. You can feel the
harm the wind is about to cause, but there is no way to slow it down. After a while I didn’t ask Kimya any
other questions, not because I was convinced by her answers but because I saw in her eyes a woman in
love. I stopped questioning this marriage, accepting it as one of those odd things in life I had no control
over.
The month of Ramadan went by so fast and busy, I didn’t have time to dwell on this matter again. Eid
fell on Sunday. Four days later we married Kimya to Shams.
The evening before the wedding, something happened that changed my entire mood. I was alone in the
kitchen, sitting in front of a floured board and a rolling pin, preparing flatbread for the guests. All of a
sudden, without thinking what I was doing, I started molding a shape out of a ball of dough. I sculpted a
small, soft Mother Mary. My Mother Mary. With the help of a knife, I carved her long robe and her face,
calm and compassionate. So absorbed was I in this that I didn’t notice someone standing behind me.
“What is it that you are making, Kerra?”
My heart jumped inside my chest. When I turned around, I saw Shams standing by the door, watching
me with inquisitive eyes. It occurred to me to hide the dough, but it was too late. Shams approached the
tray and looked at the figure.
“Is that Mary?” he asked, and when I didn’t answer, he turned to me with a beaming countenance.
“Why, she is beautiful. Do you miss Mary?”
“I converted long ago. I am a Muslim woman,” I answered curtly.
But Shams continued to talk as if he hadn’t heard me. “Perhaps you wonder why Islam doesn’t have a
female figure like Mary. There is Aisha, for sure, and certainly Fatima, but you might think it is not the
same.”
I felt uneasy, not knowing what to say.
“May I tell you a story?” Shams asked.
And this is what he told me:
Once there were four travelers, a Greek, an Arab, a Persian, and a Turk. Upon reaching a small
town, they decided to get something to eat. As they had limited money they had only one choice to
make. Each said he had the best food in the world in mind. When asked what that was, the Persian
answered “angoor,” the Greek said “staphalion,” the Arab asked for “aneb,” and the Turk demanded
“üzüm.” Unable to understand one another’s language, they began to argue.
They kept quarreling among themselves, feeling more resentful and bitter with every passing
minute, until a Sufi who happened to pass by interrupted them. With the money collected the Sufi
bought a bunch of grapes. He then put the grapes in a container and pressed hard. He made the
travelers drink the juice and threw away the skin, because what mattered was the essence of the fruit,
not its outer form.
“Christians, Jews, and Muslims are like those travelers. While they quarrel about the outer form, the
Sufi is after the essence,” Shams said, giving me a smile that conveyed such excitement that it was hard
not to be carried away by it.
“What I am trying to say is, there is no reason for you to miss Mother Mary, because you don’t need to
abandon her in the first place. As a Muslim woman, you can still feel attached to her.”
“I … I don’t think that would be right,” I stammered.
“I don’t see why not. Religions are like rivers: They all flow to the same sea. Mother Mary stands for
compassion, mercy, affection, and unconditional love. She is both personal and universal. As a Muslim
woman, you can keep liking her and even name your daughter Mary.”
“I don’t have a daughter,” I said.
“You will have one.”
“You think so?”
“I know so.”
I felt excited to hear such words, but before long the excitement was washed away by another feeling:
solidarity. Sharing an unusual moment of serenity and harmony, we looked at the figure of Mother Mary
together. My heart warmed to Shams, and for the first time since he’d come to our house, I was able to see
what Rumi saw in him: a man with a big heart.
Still, I doubted he would make a good husband for Kimya.
Ella
BOSTON, JUNE 29, 2008
By the time Ella got to the hotel, she was so tense she couldn’t think properly. There was a group of
Japanese tourists in the lobby, all of whom appeared to be in their seventies and sported the same haircut.
She crossed the lobby, scanning the paintings on the walls, so as not to have to look in the eyes of the
people around her. But it didn’t take long for her curiosity to defeat her timidity. And the moment her gaze
slid toward the meeting area, she saw him, watching her.
He was wearing a khaki button-down shirt and dark corduroy trousers, and had a two-day stubble that
she thought made him quite attractive. His curly chestnut hair fell over his green eyes, giving him an air of
confidence and mischief all at once. Wiry and thin, light and lithe, he was very different from David in his
expensive tailor-made suits. He spoke with a Scottish brogue, which she found charming, and smiled with
an ease of manner, looking genuinely happy and excited to see her. And Ella couldn’t help asking herself
what harm there could be in having a cup of coffee with him.
Later on, she would not be able to remember how one cup of coffee became several cups, or how the
conversation took on an increasingly intimate tone, or how at some point he planted a kiss on her
fingertip, just as she would not be able to explain why she didn’t do anything to stop him. After a while
nothing seemed to matter as long as he kept talking and she could let her gaze linger on the small dimple at
the corner of his mouth, wondering what it would be like to kiss him there. It was half past eleven o’clock
in the evening. She was in a hotel with a man she didn’t know anything about, aside from some e-mails
and phone calls and the novel he’d written.
“So you’re here for Smithsonian magazine?” Ella asked.
“Actually, I’m here for you,” Aziz answered. “After reading your letter, I wanted to come and see you.”
Still, there were possible exit routes off this fast-moving highway. Up to a certain moment, it remained
possible to pretend that everything was just on friendly terms—the e-mails, the phone calls, even the
glances. A bit flirtatious and playful, perhaps, but nothing more than that. She could have drawn a line.
That is, until he asked, “Ella, would you like to come to my room?”
If this was a game they were both playing, that was when it got serious. His question made everything
far too real, as if a mantle had been lifted and the truth, the naked truth that had been there all along, now
looked them squarely in the face. Ella felt something stir in her stomach, a bubbling discomfort that she
recognized as panic, but she did not turn him down. This was the most impulsive decision she had made
in her life, and yet at the same time it felt as if the decision had already been made for her. All she needed
to do was to accept it.
Room 608 was pleasantly decorated in hues of black, red, gray, and beige. It was warm and spacious. She
tried to remember the last time she’d stayed in a hotel. A trip to Montreal with her husband and children a
long time ago popped into her mind. After that, they had spent all their vacations at their house in Rhode
Island, and she’d had no reason to stay in a place where the towels were changed daily and breakfast was
prepared by others. Being in a hotel room felt like being in a different country. And perhaps she was.
Already she could feel the frivolous freedom one could enjoy only in a city where everyone was a
complete stranger.
But as soon as she walked into the room, her nervousness came back. No matter how tasteful the decor
or how spacious the room, the king-size bed was clearly at its center. Standing next to it made her feel
awkward and guilty. She started struggling with internal questions, getting nowhere. Would they make
love now? Should they? If they did, how could she look her husband in the eye afterward? But David
never had any difficulty looking her in the eye despite his many flings, did he? And what would Aziz think
of her body? What if he didn’t like it? Shouldn’t she be thinking about her children now? Were they
asleep or awake watching TV at this hour? If they learned what she was about to do, would they ever
forgive her?
Sensing her unease, Aziz held her hand and moved her toward an armchair in the corner, away from the
bed.
“Hush,” he whispered. “It’s so crowded inside your mind. Too many voices.”
“I wish we had met earlier,” Ella heard herself say.
“There is no such thing as early or late in life,” Aziz said. “Everything happens at the right time.”
“Do you really believe that?”
He smiled and brushed a cloud of hair out of his eyes. Then he opened a suitcase and brought out the
tapestry he’d bought in Guatemala and a small box that turned out to be a necklace of turquoise and red
coral balls with a silver whirling dervish.
Ella let him put the necklace around her neck. Where his fingers touched her skin, she felt warm. “Can
you love me?” she asked.
“I already love you.” Aziz smiled.
“But you don’t even know me!”
“I don’t have to know to love.”
Ella sighed. “This is crazy.”
Aziz reached around and pulled out the pin holding her bun, letting her hair loose. Then he gently
moved her onto the bed. Slowly, tenderly, and in ever-growing circles, he moved his palms up from her
feet toward her ankles and from there toward her belly. All the while his lips muttered words that
sounded like a secret ancient code to Ella. Suddenly she understood. He was praying. While his hands
caressed every inch of her body, his eyes remained firmly closed and his lips prayed for her. It was the
most spiritual thing she had ever experienced. And although she kept her clothes on, and so did he, and
although there was nothing carnal about it, it was the sexiest feeling she had ever experienced.
All at once her palms, her elbows, her shoulders, her whole body began to tingle with a strange energy.
She was possessed by so magnificent a desire that she felt as though she were floating on warm, wavy
waters where all she could do was surrender and smile. She sensed a living presence around him, then
around her, as if they were both being showered in a drizzle of light.
She, too, closed her eyes now, drifting in a wild river without holding on to anything. There might be a
waterfall at the end for all she knew, but even if she could have stopped, she wasn’t sure she wanted to.
Ella felt a burning between her legs when his hands reached her belly, drawing a circle there. She felt
insecure about her body, her hips and thighs and the shape of her breasts, which were far from perfect
after three kids and all these years, but the anxiety came and went. Feeling buoyant, almost protected, she
snapped into a state of bliss. And just like that, she realized she could love this man. She could love him
so much.
With that feeling she put her arms around Aziz, pulling him toward her, ready to go further. But he
snapped his eyes open, kissed her on the tip of her nose, and pulled away.
“You don’t want me?” Ella asked, amazed by the fragility of her voice.
“I don’t want to do anything that would make you unhappy afterward.”
Half of her felt like crying; the other half was elated. A strange feeling of lightness took hold of her.
She was entirely confused, but, to her great surprise, for once it felt okay to be confused.
At half past one in the morning, Ella opened the door to her apartment in Boston. She lay on the leather
couch, unwilling to sleep in the master bed. Not because she knew that her husband had been sleeping
there with other women, but because somehow it felt better like this, as if this house didn’t belong to her
any more than a hotel room, as if she were a guest here and her true self were waiting elsewhere.
Shams
KONYA, MAY 1247
Beautiful bride, don’t you cry
Say bye to your mom, bye to dad
You will hear the birds sing tomorrow
Though it will never be the same.…
On our wedding night, I slipped out into the courtyard and sat there for a while, listening to an old
Anatolian song pour from the house amid the many other sounds. Laughter, music, gossip. Female
musicians played in the women’s section. I stood there thinking and chanting, shivering and feeling numb,
all at the same time. I pondered the lyrics of the song. Why was it that women always sang sad songs on
wedding nights? Sufis associated death with weddings and celebrated the day they died as their union
with God. Women, too, associated weddings with death, though for entirely different reasons. Even when
they were happily getting married, a wave of sadness descended upon them. In every wedding
celebration, there was mourning for the virgin who was soon to become a wife and a mother.
After the guests left, I returned to the house and meditated in a quiet corner. Then I went to the room
where Kimya was waiting for me. I found her sitting on the bed, wearing a white robe adorned with
golden threads, her hair braided into a multitude of plaits, each of which was ornamented with beads. It
was impossible to see her expression, as her face was covered with thick, red tulle. Except for a candle
that flickered by the window, the room was without light. The mirror on the wall had been covered by a
velvet cloth, as it was deemed to be bad luck for a young bride to see her reflection on her wedding night.
Beside our bed there was a pomegranate and a knife, so that we could eat the fruit and have as many
children as the seeds inside.
Kerra had told me all about the local customs, reminding me to give the bride a necklace with gold
coins upon opening her veil. But I never had gold coins in my life and did not want to greet my bride with
coins borrowed from someone else. So when I lifted Kimya’s veil, all I did was to give her a comb made
of tortoiseshell and plant a small kiss on her lips. She smiled. And for a second I felt as shy as a lost little
boy.
“You are beautiful,” I said.
She blushed. But then she squared her shoulders, doing her best to look more tranquil and mature than
she could ever be.
“I am your wife now,” she said.
Then she pointed toward the beautiful carpet on the floor, which she had crafted on her own and with
great care as part of her dowry. Exuberant colors, sharp contrasts. As soon as I saw it I knew that every
knot and every pattern on the carpet was about me. Kimya had been weaving her dreams.
I kissed her again. The warmth of her lips sent waves of desire across my entire body. She smelled of
jasmine and wildflowers. Stretching out beside her, I inhaled her smell and touched her breasts, so small
and firm. All I wanted was to enter her and get lost inside her. She offered herself to me the way a
rosebud opens to the rain.
I pulled away. “I’m sorry, Kimya. I can’t do this.”
She looked at me, still and stunned, forgetting to breathe. The disappointment in her eyes was too much
to bear. I jumped to my feet.
“I need to go,” I said.
“You cannot go now,” Kimya said in a voice that didn’t sound like her. “What will people say if you
leave the room now? They will know that this marriage was not consummated. And they’ll think it was
because of me.”
“What do you mean?” I murmured, half to myself, because I knew what she was suggesting.
Averting her eyes, she mumbled something incomprehensible, and then she said quietly, “They’ll think I
wasn’t a virgin. I’ll have to live in shame.”
It made my blood boil that society imposed such ridiculous rules on its individuals. These codes of
honor had less to do with the harmony God created than with the order human beings wanted to sustain.
“That’s nonsense. People should mind their own business,” I objected, but I knew that Kimya was right.
With one quick move, I grabbed the knife beside the pomegranate. I glimpsed a trace of panic in
Kimya’s face, slowly replaced by the expression of someone who recognized a sad situation and accepted
it. Without hesitation I cut my left palm. My blood dripped on our bedsheet, leaving dark crimson stains.
“Just give them this sheet. This will shut their mouths, and your name will remain pure and clean, the
way it should be.”
“Wait, please! Don’t go,” Kimya beseeched. She rose to her feet, but, not knowing what to do next, she
repeated once again, “I am your wife now.”
In that moment I understood what a terrible mistake I had made by marrying her. My head throbbing
with pain, I walked out of the room into the night. A man like me should never have gotten married. I
wasn’t designed to perform marital duties. I saw this clearly. What saddened me was the cost of this
knowledge.
I felt a strong need to run away from everything, not only from this house, this marriage, this town, but
also from this body I had been given. Yet the thought of seeing Rumi the next morning held me anchored
here. I couldn’t abandon him again.
I was trapped.
Aladdin
KONYA, MAY 1247
Being forced into a decision that I knew I would deeply regret later, I remained silent and did not openly
object to this marriage. But on the day Kimya was going to be married to Shams, I woke up with a pain
such as I had never felt before. I sat up in bed gasping for breath like a drowning man, and then, annoyed
with myself for wallowing in self-pity I slapped my face again and again. A strangled sigh escaped my
lips. And it was that sound that made me realize I wasn’t my father’s son anymore.
I had no mother. No father. No brother. And no Kimya. I was all alone in the world. What little
remained of my respect for my father had disappeared overnight. Kimya was like a daughter to him. I
thought he cared about her. But apparently the only person he really cared about was Shams of Tabriz.
How could he marry Kimya to a man like him? Anyone could see that Shams would make a terrible
husband. The more I thought about it, the clearer it became that just to make Shams safe, my father had
sacrificed Kimya’s happiness—and along with it mine.
I spent the whole day struggling with these thoughts while having to watch the preparations. The house
was spruced up, and the bedroom where the newlyweds would sleep was cleansed with rosewater to
ward off evil spirits. But they forgot the biggest evil! How were they going to fend off Shams?
By late afternoon I couldn’t stand it anymore. Determined not to be part of a celebration that meant only
torture for me, I headed for the door.
“Aladdin, wait! Where are you going?” My brother’s voice came from behind me, loud and sharp.
“I am going to stay at Irshad’s house tonight,” I said without looking at him.
“Have you gone crazy? How can you not stay for the wedding? If our father hears this it will break his
heart.”
I could feel rage rising from the pit of my stomach. “How about the hearts our father is breaking?”
“What are you talking about?”
“Don’t you get it? Our father arranged this marriage just to please Shams and make sure he doesn’t run
away again! He offered Kimya to him on a silver tray.”
My brother pursed his lips, looking hurt. “I know what you are thinking, but you are wrong. You think
this is a forced marriage,” he said, “whereas it was Kimya who wanted to marry Shams.”
“As if she had a choice in the matter,” I snapped.
“Oh, God! Don’t you understand?” my brother exclaimed, lifting both palms up as though asking help
from God. “She is in love with Shams.”
“Don’t say that again. That is not true.” My voice cracked like thawing ice.
“My brother,” Sultan Walad said, “please don’t let your feelings veil your eyes. You are jealous. But
even jealousy can be used in a constructive way and serve a higher purpose. Even disbelief can be
positive. It is one of the rules. Rule Number Thirty-five: In this world, it is not similarities or
regularities that take us a step forward, but blunt opposites. And all the opposites in the universe are
present within each and every one of us. Therefore the believer needs to meet the unbeliever residing
within. And the nonbeliever should get to know the silent faithful in him. Until the day one reaches the
stage of Insan-i Kâmil, the perfect human being, faith is a gradual process and one that necessitates
its seeming opposite: disbelief.
That was the last straw for me.
“Look here, I’m sick of all this syrupy Sufi talk. Besides, why should I listen to you? It’s all your fault!
You could have left Shams in Damascus. Why did you bring him back? If things get messy, and I am sure
they will, you are the one who is responsible.”
My brother gnawed the insides of his mouth with a look that verged on fearfulness. I realized in that
instant that for the first time in our lives he was frightened of me and the things I was capable of doing. It
was a bizarre feeling, but strangely comforting.
As I walked to Irshad’s house, taking the side streets that reeked of foul smells so that nobody would
see me cry, I could think of only one thing: Shams and Kimya sharing the same bed. The thought of him
taking her wedding dress off and touching her milky skin with his rough, ugly hands was revolting. My
stomach was tied in knots.
I knew that a line had been crossed. Somebody had to do something.
Kimya
KONYA, DECEMBER 1247
Bride and groom—that is what we were supposed to be. It has been seven months since we got married.
All this time he hasn’t slept with me as my husband even once. Hard as I try to hide the truth from people,
I can’t help suspecting they know it. Sometimes I fear that my shame is visible on my face. Like writing on
my forehead, it is the first thing that anyone who looks at me notices. While I am talking to neighbors on
the street, working in the orchards, or bartering with the vendors in the bazaar, it takes people, even
strangers, only a glance to see that I am a married woman but still a virgin.
Not that Shams never comes to my room. He does. Each time he wants to visit me in the evening, he
asks me beforehand if it is all right. And each time I give the same answer.
“Of course it is,” I say. “You are my husband.”
Then all day long I wait for him with bated breath, hoping and praying that this time our marriage will
be consummated. But when he finally knocks on my door, all he wants to do is sit and talk. He also enjoys
reading together. We have read Layla and Majnun, Farhad and Shirin, Yusuf and Zuleikha, The Rose
and the Nightingale—stories of lovers who have loved each other against all odds. Despite the strength
and determination of their main characters, I find these stories depressing. Perhaps it is because deep
inside I know that I will never taste love of such proportions.
When not reading stories, Shams talks about the Forty Rules of the Itinerant Mystics of Islam—the
basic principles of the religion of love. Once he put his head on my lap as he was explaining a rule. He
slowly closed his eyes, and as his voice trailed off into a whisper, he fell asleep. My fingers combed
through his long hair, and my lips kissed his forehead. It seemed an eternity before he opened his eyes.
Pulling me down toward himself, he kissed me softly. It was the most blissful moment we ever had
together. But that was it. To this day his body is an unknown continent to me, as is my body to him.
During these seven months, I, too, have been to his room several times. But each time I visit him
unannounced, my heart constricts with anxiety as I can never tell how he will receive me. It is impossible
to predict Shams’s moods. Sometimes he is so warm and loving that I forget all my sorrow, but then at
other times he can be extremely grumpy. Once he slammed his door in my face, yelling that he wanted to
be left alone. I have learned not to take any offense, just as I have learned not to bother him when he is in
deep meditation.
For months on end after the wedding, I pretended to be content, perhaps less with others than with
myself. I forced myself to see Shams not as a husband but as almost everything else: a friend, a soul mate,
a master, a companion, even a son. Depending on the day, depending on his mood, I thought of him as one
or the other, dressing him up in a different costume in my imagination.
And for a while it worked. Without expecting much, I began to look forward to our conversations. It
pleased me immensely that he appreciated my thoughts and encouraged me to think more creatively. I
learned so many things from him, and in time, I realized, I, too, could teach him a few things such as the
joys of family life, which he had never tasted before. To this day I believe I can make him laugh as no one
else could.
But it wasn’t enough. Whatever I did, I could not rid my mind of the thought that he didn’t love me. I
had no doubt that he liked me and meant me well. But this wasn’t anything even close to love. So
harrowing was this thought that it was eating me up inside, gnawing at my body and soul. I became
detached from the people around me, friends and neighbors alike. I now preferred to stay in my room and
talk with dead people. Unlike the living, the dead never judged.
Other than the dead, the only friend I had was Desert Rose.
United in a common need to stay out of society, we had become close friends. She is a Sufi now. She
leads a solitary life, having left the brothel behind her. Once I told her I envied her courage and
determination to start life anew.
She shook her head and said, “But I have not started life anew. The only thing I did was to die before
death.”
Today I went to see Desert Rose for an entirely different reason. I had planned to maintain my composure
and talk to her calmly, but as soon as I entered, I started choking back sobs.
“Kimya, are you all right?” she asked.
“I am not feeling well,” I confessed. “I think I need your help.”
“Certainly,” she said. “What can I do for you?”
“It is about Shams.… He doesn’t come near me … I mean, not in that way,” I stuttered halfway through
but managed to finish my sentence. “I want to make myself attractive to him. I want you to teach me how.”
Desert Rose exhaled, almost a sigh. “I took an oath, Kimya,” she said, a weary note slipping into her
voice. “I promised God to stay clean and pure and not even think anymore about the ways a woman could
give pleasure to a man.”
“But you are not going to break your oath. You are just going to help me,” I pleaded. “I am the one who
needs to learn how to make Shams happy.”
“Shams is an enlightened man,” Desert Rose said, lowering her voice a notch, as if afraid of being
heard. “I don’t think this is the right way to approach him.”
“But he is a man, isn’t he?” I reasoned. “Aren’t all men the sons of Adam and bound by the flesh?
Enlightened or not, we all have been given a body. Even Shams has a body, doesn’t he?”
“Yes, but … ” Desert Rose grabbed her tasbih and started to finger the beads one at a time, her head
tilted in contemplation.
“Oh, please,” I begged. “You are the only one I can confide in. It has been seven months. Every
morning I wake up with the same heaviness in my chest, every night I go to sleep in tears. It can’t go on
like this. I need to seduce my husband!”
Desert Rose said nothing. I took off my scarf, grabbed her head, and forced her to look at me. I said,
“Tell me the truth. Am I so ugly?”
“Of course not, Kimya. You are a beautiful young woman.”
“Then help me. Teach me the way to a man’s heart,” I insisted.
“The way to a man’s heart can sometimes take a woman far away from herself, my dear,” Desert Rose
said ominously.
“I don’t care,” I said. “I am ready to go as far as it takes.”
Desert Rose
KONYA, DECEMBER 1247
Bursting into tears, she kept begging me to help, her face swollen, her chest heaving harder and faster,
until I finally told her I would lend a hand. Even as I comforted her, deep inside I knew it was hopeless, I
knew I should never have yielded to her demands. Still, I wonder how could I not have seen this tragedy
coming? Torn with guilt, I keep asking myself again and again, how could I have been so naïve and not
seen that things would take such a terrible turn?
But the day she came to me crying for help, there was no way I could turn her down.
“Teach me, please,” she begged me, her hands demurely folded in her lap, like the good girl she was
raised to be. Hers was a voice that no longer had a reason to hope yet was hopeful all the same.
What harm could there be in this? I thought as my heart lurched in compassion. It was her husband she
wanted to seduce, for God’s sake. Not a stranger! She had only one motive: love. How could this lead to
anything incorrect? Her passion might be too strong, but it was halal, wasn’t it? A halal passion!
Something inside me sensed a trap, but since it was God who set it, I saw no harm in walking right in.
This is how I decided to help Kimya, this village girl whose only notion of beauty was applying henna to
her hands.
I taught her how to make herself more attractive and good-looking. She was an avid student, eager to
learn. I showed her how to take long perfumed baths, soften her skin with scented oils and ointments, and
apply masks of milk and honey. I gave her amber beads to braid in her hair so that her head would have a
sweet, lasting smell. Lavender, chamomile, rosemary, thyme, lily, marjoram, and olive oil—I told her
how to apply each and which incenses to burn at night. Then I showed her how to whiten her teeth, paint
her nails and toes with henna, apply kohl on her eyes and eyebrows, redden her lips and cheeks, how to
make her hair look lush and silky and her breasts bigger and rounder. Together we went to a store in the
bazaar I knew too well from the past. There we bought her silk robes and silk undergarments, the likes of
which she had never seen or touched before.
Then I taught her how to dance in front of a man, how to use this body God had given her. After two
weeks of preparation, she was ready.
That afternoon I prepared Kimya for Shams of Tabriz, the way a shepherd prepares a sacrificial lamb.
First she took a warm bath, scrubbing her skin with soapy cloths and anointing her hair with oils. Then I
helped her to get dressed in clothes that a woman could wear only for her husband, and even for him only
once or twice in a lifetime. I had chosen a cherry-colored sheath and a pink robe gilded with hyacinths, of
the sort that would reveal the shape of her breasts. Lastly we applied lots and lots of paint on her face.
With a string of pearls across her forehead added as a final touch, she looked so pretty that I couldn’t take
my eyes off her.
When we were done, Kimya didn’t look like an inexperienced, timid girl anymore, but a woman
burning with love and passion. A woman ready to make a bold move for the man she loved and, if
necessary, to pay a price. As I stood inspecting her, I remembered the verse of Joseph and Zuleikha in the
Holy Qur’an.
Just like Kimya, Zuleikha, too, had been consumed by a desire for a man who did not respond to her
overtures. When the ladies in the city had maliciously gossiped about her, Zuleikha had invited them all to
a banquet. She gave each of them a knife: and she said (to Joseph), “Come out before them.” When
they saw him, they did extol him, and (in their amazement) cut their hands: they said, “God preserve
us! No mortal is this! This is none other than a noble angel.”
Who could blame Zuleikha for desiring Joseph so much?
“How do I look?” Kimya asked anxiously before she put on her veil, ready to step out the door and onto
the street.
“You look exquisite,” I said. “Your husband will not only make love to you tonight, he’ll come back
tomorrow asking for more.”
Kimya blushed so hard her cheeks turned rosy red. I laughed, and after a brief pause she joined me, her
laughter warming me like sunshine.
I meant what I’d said, as I felt confident that she would be able to attract Shams, the way a flower rich
with nectar attracts a bee. And yet when our eyes met just before she opened the door, I saw that a trace of
doubt had crept into her gaze. Suddenly I had a bad feeling in the pit of my stomach, almost a premonition
that something terrible was going to happen.
But I didn’t stop her. I should have known better. I should have seen it coming. For as long as I live, I
will never forgive myself.
Kimya
KONYA, DECEMBER 1247
Bold, boisterous, and intelligent, Shams of Tabriz knows a great deal about love. But there is one thing he
doesn’t know anything about: the pain of unrequited love.
The evening Desert Rose dressed me, I was full of excitement and an audacity I didn’t know I had in
me. The soft rustle of the silk dress against my body, the scent of my perfume, the taste of rose petals on
my tongue—it all made me feel awkward, but also unusually brave. Back at home I caught my reflection
on a pane of glass. My body was neither rotund nor milky, and my bosom not as ample as I would have
liked, but I still thought I looked pretty.
I waited until I was sure everyone in the house had gone to sleep. Then I wrapped myself in a long,
thick shawl and tiptoed to Shams’s room.
“Kimya, I wasn’t expecting you,” he said as soon as he opened his door.
“I had to see you,” I said and stepped inside without waiting for him to invite me in. “Could you please
close the door?”
Shams looked puzzled, but he did as told.
When we were alone in the room, it took me a few seconds to muster my courage. I turned my back to
him, took a deep breath, and then, in one quick move, removed my shawl and slid my robe off. Almost
instantly I felt the weight of my husband’s surprised eyes on my back, from my neck down to my feet.
Wherever his gaze touched felt warm. But that warmth, whether it was real or imagined in my excitement,
was quickly replaced by the coldness of the silence that descended upon the room. My chest rising and
falling with apprehension, I stood in front of Shams as naked and inviting as the houris in paradise are
said to be.
In the pregnant silence, we stood listening to the wind outside, howling, raging, and wailing through the
city.
“What do you think you are doing?” he asked coldly.
It was quite an effort to find my voice, but I managed to say, “I want you.”
Shams of Tabriz walked a half circle around me and stood right in front of me, forcing me to look him
in the eye. My knees buckled beneath me, but I didn’t budge. Instead I took a step toward him and pressed
my body against his, squirming ever so slightly, offering him my warmth, the way Desert Rose had taught
me. I caressed his chest and whispered soft words of love. I drank in his fragrance as I moved my fingers
up and down his muscular back.
As if he had touched a burning stove, Shams jerked away. “You think you want me, you think you do,
but all you want is to pamper your bruised ego.”
I put my arms around his neck and kissed him, ever so hard. I pushed my tongue into his mouth and
began flicking it back and forth, as I remembered what Desert Rose had told me: “Men love to suck their
wives’ tongues, Kimya. They all do.”
His lips tasted like blackberries, sweet and sour, but just as quickly as I thought a swirl of pleasure
pulled us together, Shams stopped me and pushed me away.
“I am disappointed in you, Kimya,” Shams said. “Now, could you please get out of my room?”
As harsh as his words sounded, not a trace of feeling grazed his face. No anger. Not even the slightest
irritation. And I couldn’t tell which hurt me the most: the sharpness of his words or the blankness on his
face.
I had never felt so humiliated in my life. I bent down to take my robe, but my hands were trembling so
hard I couldn’t hold the slippery, delicate fabric. Instead I grabbed my shawl and wrapped it around
myself. Sobbing, gasping, and still half naked, I ran out of the room and away from him, away from this
love that I now understood existed only in my imagination.
I never saw Shams again. After that day I never left my room. I spent all my time lying on my bed, lacking
not so much the energy as the will to go out. A week passed, then another, and then I stopped counting the
days. All strength was drained from my body, ebbing away bit by bit. Only my palms felt alive. They
remembered the feel of Shams’s hands and the warmth of his skin.
I never knew that death had a smell. A strong odor, like pickled ginger and broken pine needles,
pungent and bitter, but not necessarily bad. I came to know it only when it started to waft around my room,
enveloping me like thick, wet fog. I started running a high fever, slipping into delirium. People came to
see me. Neighbors and friends. Kerra waited by one side of my bed, her eyes swollen, her face ashen.
Gevher stood on the other side, smiling her soft, dimpled smile.
“Goddamn that heretic,” said Safiya. “This poor girl has fallen sick of heartbreak. All because of him!”
I tried to force a sound, but it didn’t make it past my throat.
“How can you say such things? Is he God?” Kerra said, trying to help. “How can you attribute such
powers to a mortal man?”
But they didn’t listen to Kerra, and I was in no state to convince anyone of anything. In any case, I soon
realized that whatever I said or didn’t say, the outcome would be much the same. People who didn’t like
Shams had found another reason in my illness to hate him, whereas I could not dislike him even if I
wanted to.
Before long I drifted into a state of nothingness, where all colors melted into white and all sounds
dissolved into a perpetual drone. I could not distinguish people’s faces anymore and could not hear
spoken words beyond a distant hum in the background.
I don’t know if Shams of Tabriz ever came to my room to see me. Perhaps he never did. Perhaps he
wanted to see me but the women in the room would not let him in. Or perhaps he did come after all, and
sat by my bed, played me the ney for hours, held my hand, and prayed for my soul. I’d like to believe that.
Nonetheless, one way or the other, it didn’t matter anymore. I was neither angry nor cross with him.
How could I be, when I was flowing in a stream of pure awareness?
There was so much kindness and compassion in God and an explanation for everything. A perfect
system of love behind it all. Ten days after I visited Shams’s room clad in silk and perfumed tulles, ten
days after I fell ill, I plunged into a river of pure nonexistence. There I swam to my heart’s content, finally
sensing that this must be what the deepest reading of the Qur’an feels like—a drop in infinity!
And it was flowing waters that carried me from life to death.
Ella
BOSTON, JULY 3, 2008
Boston had never been this colorful and vibrant, Ella thought. Had she been blind to the city’s beauty all
this time? Aziz spent five days in Boston. Every day Ella drove from Northampton to Boston to see him.
They had tasty, modest lunches in Little Italy, visited the Museum of Fine Arts, took long walks on Boston
Common and the Waterfront, watched the whales in the aquarium, and had coffee after coffee in the busy,
small cafés of Harvard Square. They talked endlessly on subjects as diverse as the curiosities of local
cuisines, different meditation techniques, aboriginal art, gothic novels, bird-watching, gardening, growing
perfect tomatoes, and the interpretation of dreams, constantly interrupting and completing each other’s
sentences. Ella didn’t remember ever talking so much with anyone.
When they were outside on the street, they took care not to touch each other, but that proved to get
increasingly difficult. Small peccadilloes became exciting, and Ella started looking forward to a brush of
their hands. Goaded by a strange courage she never knew she had in her, in restaurants and on the streets
Ella held Aziz’s hand, kissed his lips. Not only did she not mind being seen, it felt as if a part of her
longed to be seen. Several times they returned to the hotel together, and on each occasion they came very
close to making love, but they never did.
The morning of the day Aziz was going to fly back to Amsterdam, they were in his room, his suitcase
standing between them like a nasty reminder of the parting to come.
“There’s something I need to tell you,” Ella said. “I’ve been thinking about this for too long.”
Aziz raised one eyebrow, acknowledging the sudden shift in Ella’s tone. Then he said carefully,
“There’s something I need to tell you, too.”
“Okay, you go first.”
“No, you go first.”
Still smiling her half smile, Ella lowered her gaze, contemplating what to say and how to say it. Finally
she started. “Before you came to Boston, David and I went out one evening and had a long talk. He asked
me about you. Apparently he read our e-mails without my knowledge. I was incredibly angry at him for
that, but I didn’t deny the truth. About us, I mean.”
Now Ella raised her eyes with apprehension to see how Aziz would react to what she was about to
reveal. “To make a long story short, I told my husband that I loved another man.”
Outside on the street, the sirens of several fire trucks broke the usual sounds of the city. Ella was
distracted momentarily, but then she was able to finish. “It sounds crazy, I know, but I’ve been thinking
this over very carefully. I want to come with you to Amsterdam.”
Aziz walked to the window and looked down at the hurrying and bustle outside. There was smoke
coming out of one of the buildings in the distance—a thick black cloud hovering in the air. He silently
prayed for the people who lived there. When he started to speak, it sounded as if he were addressing the
entire city.
“I would love to take you to Amsterdam with me, but I cannot promise you a future there.”
“What do you mean?” Ella asked nervously.
At this, Aziz walked back, sat by her side, put his hand on hers, and as he caressed it absentmindedly,
said, “When you first wrote to me, it happened to be a very strange time in my life.”
“You mean there is someone else in your life …?”
“No, sweetheart, no.” Aziz smiled a little, and then the smile faded. “It’s nothing like that. I once wrote
to you about the three stages in my life, remember? Those were the first three letters in the word ‘Sufi.’
You never asked me about the fourth stage, and hard as I tried, I couldn’t bring myself to tell you. My
encounter with the letter i. Would you like to listen to it now?”
“Yes,” Ella said, although she feared anything and everything that could disrupt this moment. “Yes, I
would.”
In a hotel room on that day in July, a few hours prior to his flight back to Amsterdam, Aziz told Ella how
he had become a Sufi in 1977, adopting a new name for himself and also, as he had hoped, a new destiny.
Ever since then he had traveled the world as a photographer by profession, a wandering dervish at heart.
He had made close friends on six continents, people who saw him as part of their family. Though he
hadn’t married again, he had become the foster father of two orphans in Eastern Europe. Never taking off
the necklace in the shape of the sun that he wore to remind him of Shams of Tabriz, Aziz had lived life by
traveling, reading, and teaching in the footsteps of Sufi dervishes, encountering signs of God everywhere
and in everything.
Then, two years ago, he learned about his sickness.
It started with a lump in his armpit, which apparently he was late to notice. The lump turned out to be a
malignant melanoma, a fatal form of skin cancer. The doctors said it didn’t look good, but they had to run
several tests before giving him a more definite diagnosis. A week later they returned with bad news: The
melanoma had spread to his internal organs and invaded his lungs.
At the time he was fifty-two. He was told he would not make it past fifty-five.
Ella moved her lips to say something, but the words did not come out and her mouth felt bone dry. Two
tears rolled down her cheeks, which she quickly wiped off.
Aziz kept speaking, his tone firm and urgent. He said thus commenced a new, and in some ways a more
productive, phase in his life. There were still places he wanted to see, and the first thing he did was find a
way to get to them all. He established a Sufi foundation in Amsterdam with worldwide connections. As an
amateur ney player, he gave concerts with Sufi musicians in Indonesia, Pakistan, and Egypt and even
made an album with a group of Jewish and Muslim mystics in Córdoba, Spain. He went back to Morocco
and visited the lodge where he had met real Sufis for the first time in his life. Master Sameed was long
dead, and Aziz prayed and meditated by his grave, contemplating on the trajectory his life had followed.
“Then I retreated to write the novel I had always wanted to write but, in my laziness or lack of courage,
had postponed endlessly,” said Aziz with a wink. “You know, it was one of those things I had wanted to
do for a long time. I named the book Sweet Blasphemy and sent it to a literary agency in America, not
expecting much and at the same time feeling open to all possibilities. A week later I received an intriguing
e-mail from a mystery woman in Boston.”
Ella couldn’t help but smile. A weak smile of respectful compassion, tender and pained.
Aziz said ever since that moment nothing had been the same. From a man getting ready to die, he had
turned into a man falling in love at a most unexpected time. Suddenly all the pieces that he thought he’d
long ago put into place had to be moved. Spirituality, life, family, mortality, faith, and love—he found
himself rethinking their meanings again and not wanting to die.
This new and final stage of his life he called his encounter with the letter i in the word “Sufi.” And he
said so far this stage had proved to be much more difficult than all the earlier ones, because it had come at
a time when he thought he’d worked through most, if not all, of his inner conflicts, a time when he thought
he was spiritually mature and fulfilled.
“In Sufism you learn how to die before death. I have gone through each of those stages, step by step.
Then, just when I start to think I’ve got it all neatly sorted, here comes this woman out of nowhere. She
writes to me, and I write back. After each e-mail I start waiting for her answer with bated breath. Words
become more precious than ever. The whole world turns into a blank screen, waiting to be written upon.
And I realize I want to get to know this person. I need more time with her. Suddenly my life is not enough
anymore. I realize I am scared of death, and one part of me is ready to rebel against the God I have
revered and submitted to.”
“But we will have time.… ” Ella said when she found her voice.
“My doctors tell me I have sixteen months,” Aziz said, lightly but firmly. “They might be wrong. Or
they might be right. I cannot know. You see, Ella, all I can give you is the present moment. That is all I
have. But the truth is, no one has more than that. It is just that we like to pretend we do.”
Ella peered down at her feet, leaning sideways, as if part of her were about to fall down and part of her
resisted. She started to cry.
“Don’t, please. I wanted you to come with me to Amsterdam more than anything. I wanted to say, ‘Let’s
travel the world together. Let’s see distant lands, get to know other people and admire God’s composition
together.’ ”
“That would be nice,” Ella said sniffing, like a child offered some bright-colored toy in the midst of
her wailing.
Aziz’s face darkened. He looked away from her toward the window.
“But I was afraid to ask you. I was even afraid to touch you, let alone make love. How could I ask you
to be with me and abandon your family when I had no future to offer you?”
Cringing at his question, Ella said, “Why are we being so pessimistic? You can fight this illness. You
can do it for me. For us.”
“Why do we have to fight everything?” Aziz wanted to know. “We’re always talking about fighting
inflation, fighting AIDS, fighting cancer, fighting corruption, fighting terrorism, even fighting extra pounds.
… Don’t we have any other way of dealing with things?”
“I’m not a Sufi,” Ella croaked impatiently, her voice sounding like the voice of someone else, someone
older.
At that moment many thoughts crossed her mind: the death of her father, the pain of losing a loved one
to suicide, the years and years of resentment and regret that followed, sifting through every little bit of
memory of the one who is dead, wondering if things could have been any different had those details been
shuffled differently somewhere.
“I know you’re not a Sufi.” Aziz smiled. “And you don’t have to be one. Just be Rumi. That’s all I’m
asking of you.”
“What do you mean?” she asked.
“Some time ago you asked me if I was Shams, remember? You said I reminded you of him. As happy as
I was to hear that, I cannot be Shams. I think he was way beyond and above me. But you can be Rumi. If
you let love take hold of you and change you, at first through its presence, then through its absence—”
“I’m not a poet,” Ella said this time.
“Rumi wasn’t a poet either. But he was transformed into one.”
“Don’t you get it? I’m just a housewife, for God’s sake, a mother of three,” Ella exclaimed, breathing in
huge gulps.
“We’re all what we are,” murmured Aziz. “And we’re all subject to change. It is a journey from here to
there. You can make that journey. And if you are brave enough and if I am brave enough, we can go to
Konya together in the end. That is where I want to die.”
Ella gasped. “Stop talking like that!”
Aziz watched her for a moment, and then his eyes dropped. There was a new expression on his face
now, a distance in his tone, as if he were swiftly drifting away, like a dry leaf at the mercy of the wind.
“Or else,” he said slowly, “go home, Ella. Go back to your children and your house. You decide, love.
Whatever you choose, I will respect your decision and I will love you till the end.”
Suleiman the Drunk
KONYA, MARCH 1248
Blood, sweat, and tears. Outsiders think drinkers are lazy people who have nothing else to do. Little do
they know that drinking increasing amounts of wine every day requires a lot of effort. We carry the weight
of the world on our shoulders.
Tired and petulant, I was dozing with my head on the table, having a not-so-pleasant dream. There was
a big, black bull, angry as hell, chasing me on unfamiliar streets. I ran away from the animal without a
clue as to what I had done wrong to stir him up, knocking over stalls and smashing merchandise, drawing
the anger of all the vendors in the bazaar. Still running, I entered a thoroughfare that turned out to be a
dead-end street. And there I bumped into a mammoth egg, bigger than a house. Suddenly the egg started to
hatch, and out came the ugliest baby bird ever, wet and noisy. I tried to get out of the street, but the mother
bird appeared in the sky, glaring down at me as if I had been responsible for the ugliness of her baby. Just
as the bird began to descend, its sharp beak and even sharper claws pointed at me, I woke up.
I opened my eyes and realized that I had fallen asleep on a table by the window. Though my mouth
tasted like rusty nails and I was dying to have a drink, I felt too tired to even move. So I kept resting my
heavy head on the table, sinking ever deeper into my stupor and listening to the usual sounds in the tavern.
I heard a heated argument rising and falling like the buzz of swarming bees. It came from the men sitting
at the next table, and though I briefly considered the possibility of turning my head to see who they were, I
did not move a muscle. And that is when I overheard that ominous word: murder.
At first I dismissed their talk as drunken ravings. One hears all sorts of things in a tavern and in time
learns not to take every spoken word seriously. But there was something in their tone too menacing and
potent to disregard, so I pricked my ears and listened. My jaw dropped open when it finally dawned upon
me that they were serious. But even deeper was my shock when I understood who it was that they wanted
to kill: Shams of Tabriz.
As soon as they left the table, I stopped feigning sleep and jumped to my feet.
“Hristos, come here! Be quick!” I yelled in panic.
“What is it this time?” Hristos came running. “Why are you so distressed?”
But I couldn’t tell. Not even him. All of a sudden, everyone looked suspicious. What if there were more
people involved in this conspiracy against Shams? I had to keep my mouth shut and my eyes wide open.
“Nothing! I’m hungry, that’s all,” I said. “Could you please bring me some soup? Make it with a lot of
garlic. I need to sober up!”
Hristos stared at me quizzically, but, being used to my moodiness, he did not ask me any more
questions. In a few minutes, he brought me a bowl of goat-intestine soup, spicy and scorching, which I ate
in haste, my tongue burning. Having sobered up sufficiently, I dashed into the street to warn Shams of
Tabriz.
First I tried Rumi’s house. He wasn’t there. Then I went to the mosque, the madrassa, the teahouse, the
bakery, the hamam.… I looked in every store and cellar on the street of artisans. I even checked the old
Gypsy woman’s tent among the ruins, in case he had gone there to get rid of a sore tooth or a bad spell. I
looked for him everywhere, my anxiety growing with every passing minute. Fear began to gnaw at me.
What if it was too late? What if they had already killed him?
Hours later, not knowing where else to look, I made my way back to the tavern, downhearted and
exhausted. And just like magic, only a few steps away from the tavern door, I bumped right into him.
“Hello, Suleiman. You look preoccupied,” Shams said, smiling.
“Oh, my God! You’re alive!” I exclaimed, and ran to his arms.
When he managed to pull away from my embrace, Shams stared at me, looking quite amused. “Of
course I’m alive! Do I look like a ghost to you?”
I smiled, but not for long. My head ached so much that at any other time I would have downed a few
bottles to get drunk as quickly as possible and doze off.
“What is it, my friend? Is everything all right?” Shams asked suspiciously.
I swallowed hard. What if he didn’t believe me when I told him about the plot? What if he thought I’d
been hallucinating under the influence of wine? And perhaps I was. Even I couldn’t be sure.
“They’re planning to kill you,” I said. “I have no idea who they are. I couldn’t see their faces. You see,
I was sleeping.… But I didn’t dream this. I mean, I did have a dream, but it wasn’t like this. And I wasn’t
drunk. Well, I had drunk a few glasses, but I wasn’t—”
Shams put his hand on my shoulder. “Calm down, my friend. I understand.”
“You do?”
“Yes. Now, go back to the tavern, and don’t you worry about me.”
“No, no! I’m not going anywhere. And neither are you,” I objected. “These people are serious. You
need to be careful. You cannot go back to Rumi’s house. That is the first place they will look for you.”
Oblivious to my panic, Shams stayed silent.
“Listen, dervish, my house is small and a bit stuffy. But if you don’t mind that, you can stay with me as
long as you want.”
“Thank you for your concern,” Shams murmured. “But nothing happens outside of God’s will. It is one
of the rules: This world is erected upon the principle of reciprocity. Neither a drop of kindness nor a
speck of evil will remain unreciprocated. Fear not the plots, deceptions, or tricks of other people. If
somebody is setting a trap, remember, so is God. He is the biggest plotter. Not even a leaf stirs outside
God’s knowledge. Simply and fully believe in that. Whatever God does, He does beautifully.”
Having said that, Shams gave me a wink and waved good-bye. I watched him thread his way rapidly
through the muddy street in the direction of Rumi’s house, despite my warnings.
The Killer
KONYA, MARCH 1248
Bastards! Idiots! I told them not to come with me. I explained to them that I always work alone and hate to
see clients meddling in my affairs. But they insisted, reasoning that since the dervish had supernatural
powers, they had to see him dead with their own eyes.
“All right,” I conceded in the end. “But make sure you don’t get anywhere near me until everything is
over.”
They agreed. There were three of them now. The two men I knew from the earlier meeting and a new
guy who sounded just as young and tense as the others. They all had their faces wrapped in black scarves.
As if I cared about discovering their identities!
After midnight I was outside Rumi’s house. I jumped over the stone wall into the courtyard and hid
myself behind a bush. My clients had assured me that Shams of Tabriz had the habit of meditating in the
courtyard every night, before or after performing his ablutions. All I had to do was wait.
It was a windy night, unusually chilly for this time of the year. The sword felt heavy and cold in my
palm, the two coral beads that embellished its handle rough under my fingers. Just in case, I had also
brought with me a small sheathed dagger.
There was a pale blue haze around the moon. A few nocturnal animals hooted and howled from afar. I
caught the sweet whiff of roses in the wind buffeting the trees. Strangely, the smell made me uneasy. Even
before I reached the house, I hadn’t been in the best of moods. But now it was worse. As I stood there,
wrapped by that overly sweet odor, I couldn’t help but feel a strong urge to drop the entire plan and leave
this spooky place at once.
But I stayed, true to my word. I didn’t know how much time had passed. My eyelids began to feel
heavy, and I kept yawning despite myself. As the wind’s fury intensified, for some reason unbeknownst to
me my mind kept raking up memories, dark and vexing, of all the men I had killed. My apprehension
surprised me. It usually didn’t make me nervous to remember the past. Pensive and withdrawn, perhaps,
even sullen from time to time, but never nervous.
I whistled a few songs to boost my morale, and when that didn’t help, I fixed my gaze on the back door
of the house and whispered, “Come on, Shams. Don’t make me wait here too long. Come out into the
courtyard.”
No sound. No movement. Nothing.
All of a sudden, it began to rain. From where I stood, I could see over the slanted walls of the
courtyard. Soon the downpour was so hard that the streets turned into rushing rivers and I was completely
soaked.
“Damn it,” I said. “Damn! Damn!”
I was considering giving up for the night when I heard a sharp sound over the clatter of rain on the roofs
and roads. There was someone in the courtyard.
It was Shams of Tabriz. Holding an oil lamp in his hand, he walked in my direction and stopped only a
few steps away from the bush where I was hiding.
“It is a lovely night, isn’t it?” he asked.
Scarcely able to contain my confusion, I gasped. Was there someone else next to him, or was he talking
to himself? Did he know I was here? Could he possibly be aware of my presence? My mind was boiling
with questions.
Then another thought occurred to me. How could the lamp in his hand keep burning despite the mighty
wind and the heavy rain? And as soon as this question crossed my mind, I felt a shiver down my spine.
I remembered the rumors about Shams. He so excelled in black magic, people said, that he could turn
anyone into a braying donkey or a blind bat by simply tying a piece of string from that person’s clothes
and uttering his evil incantations. Though I had never believed in such nonsense and wasn’t going to start
doing so now, as I stood watching the flame of Shams’s lamp flicker under the heavy rain, I couldn’t stay
still, I was trembling so.
“Years ago I had a master in Tabriz,” Shams said as he put the lamp on the ground, thus taking it out of
my eyesight. “He is the one who taught me there was a time for everything. It is one of the last rules.”
What rules was he talking about? What cryptic talk was this? I had to decide quickly whether I should
come out of the bush now or wait until he turned his back to me—except he never did. If he knew I was
here, there was no point in hiding. In case he didn’t, though, I had to measure well when to come out.
But then, as if to deepen my confusion, I noticed the silhouettes of the three men waiting under a
covering outside the garden wall shift restlessly. They must have been wondering why I hadn’t moved to
kill the dervish.
“It is Rule Number Thirty-seven,” Shams continued. “God is a meticulous clockmaker. So precise is
His order that everything on earth happens in its own time. Neither a minute late nor a minute early.
And for everyone without exception, the clock works accurately. For each there is a time to love and a
time to die.”
In that moment I understood that he was talking to me. He knew I was here. He had known it even
before he stepped out into the courtyard. My heart started to race. I felt as if all around me the air were
being sucked away. There was no use in hiding anymore. And just like that, I stood up and walked out
from behind the bush. The rain stopped as abruptly as it had started, plunging everything into silence. We
stood face-to-face, the killer and the victim, and despite the strangeness of the situation everything seemed
natural, almost peaceful.
I pulled out my sword and swung it with all my might. The dervish dodged the blow with a swiftness I
did not expect from a man of his size. I was about to swing again when suddenly a rush of movement
swirled in the darkness and six men appeared out of nowhere, attacking the dervish with clubs and spears.
Apparently the three young men had brought friends. The ensuing battle was so intense that they all
toppled to the ground, rolling around, regaining footing, and falling again, breaking spear after spear into
splinters.
I stood watching, shocked and furious. Never before had I been reduced to playing witness to a murder
I was paid to commit. I was so angry at the three young men for their insolence that I could easily have let
the dervish go and fought them instead.
But before long, one of the men started to yell hysterically. “Help! Help us, Jackal Head! He is going to
kill us.”
Fast as lightning I threw my sword aside, pulled my dagger out of my belt, and dashed forward. The
seven of us knocked the dervish to the ground, and in one swift move I stabbed him in the heart. A single
hoarse cry came out of his mouth, his voice breaking at its peak. He didn’t stir again, nor did he breathe.
Together we lifted his body, which was strangely light, and dumped him into the well. Gasping loudly
for air, we each then took a step back and waited to hear the sound of his body hitting the water.
It never came.
“What the hell is going on?” said one of the men. “Didn’t he fall in?”
“Of course he did,” another said. “How could he not?”
They were panicking. So was I.
“Maybe he got caught on a hook on the wall,” the third man suggested.
The suggestion made sense. It took the burden of finding an explanation off our shoulders, and we
gladly embraced it, though we all knew there were no hooks on the walls of wells.
I don’t know how long we waited there, avoiding one another’s eyes. A cool breeze crossed the
courtyard, sprinkling thin, brown willow leaves around our feet. High in the sky above, the dark blue of
the morning was just beginning to break into violet. We might have stayed there until long into the day had
the back door of the house not opened and a man walked out. I recognized him instantly. It was Mawlana.
“Where are you?” he yelled, his voice heavy with concern. “Are you there, Shams?”
At the mention of his name, all seven of us took to our heels. The six men jumped over the garden walls
and disappeared into the night. I remained behind, searching for my dagger, which I found under a bush,
covered with mud. I knew I should not linger there, not even a second, but I couldn’t resist the temptation
of looking back.
And when I did, I saw Rumi stagger into the courtyard and then suddenly lurch to his left, toward the
well, as if guided by an intuition. He leaned forward, peered down, and stood like that for a moment, his
eyes adjusting to the semidarkness inside the well. Then he pulled back, fell to his knees, pounded his
chest, and let out a terrifying scream.
“They killed him! They killed my Shams!”
I jumped over the wall and, leaving behind the dagger with the blood of the dervish on it, ran as I had
never run before.
Ella
NORTHAMPTON, AUGUST 12, 2008
Balmy and sunny, it was an ordinary day in August. A day like any other. Ella woke up early in the
morning, prepared breakfast for her husband and children, watched them leave for work and chess and
tennis clubs, went back to her kitchen, opened her cookbook, and chose the day’s menu:
Spinach Soup with Creamy Mushroom Mash
Mussels with Mustard Mayonnaise
Seared Scallops with Tarragon-Butter Sauce
Garden Salad with Cranberries
Zucchini Rice Gratin
Rhubarb and Vanilla Cream Lattice Pie
It took her all afternoon to cook the dishes. When she was done, she took out her best china. She set the
table, folded the napkins, and arranged the flowers. She set the oven timer for forty minutes, so that the
gratin could be warm by seven o’clock. She prepared the croutons, put the dressing in the salad, thick and
fatty, just as Avi preferred. It occurred to her to light the candles, but she changed her mind upon second
thought. It was better to leave the table like this. Like an immaculate picture. Untouched. Unmoving.
Then she grabbed the suitcase she had earlier prepared and left her house. As she walked out, she
murmured one of Shams’s rules. “It is never too late to ask yourself, ‘Am I ready to change the life I am
living? Am I ready to change within?’
“Even if a single day in your life is the same as the day before, it surely is a pity. At every moment
and with each new breath, one should be renewed and renewed again. There is only one way to be
born into a new life: to die before death.”
Aladdin
KONYA, APRIL 1248
Blowing hot and cold, changing my mind every passing minute as to how I should behave toward others,
three weeks after Shams’s death, I finally mustered the courage to go and talk to my father. I found him in
the library, sitting alone by the firelight, as still as an alabaster statue, shadows leaping across his face.
“Father, can I talk to you?” I asked.
Slowly, hazily, as if swimming back to the shore from a sea of reveries, he looked at me and said
nothing.
“Father, I know you think I have a role in Shams’s death, but let me assure you—”
All of a sudden, my father raised his finger, interrupting my words. “Between you and me, son of mine,
words have dried up. I have nothing to hear from you and nothing to tell you in return,” he pronounced.
“Please don’t say that. Let me explain,” I begged, my voice shaking. “I swear to God. It wasn’t me. I
know the people who did it, but it wasn’t me.”
“My son,” my father interjected again, the sorrow draining out of him, replaced by the chilling
calmness of someone who has finally accepted a terrible truth, “you say it wasn’t you, but there is blood
on your hem.”
I flinched and instantly checked the ends of my robe. Could it be true? Was there blood on me from that
evening? I inspected my hem, and then my sleeves, hands, and fingernails. It all seemed clean. When I
raised my head again, I came eye to eye with my father and only then understood the little trap that he had
set for me.
By inadvertently checking my hem for blood, I had given myself away.
It is true. I did join them in the tavern that evening. I am the one who told the killer that Shams had the
habit of meditating every night in the courtyard. And later that night, when Shams was talking to his killer
under the rain, I was one of the six men eavesdropping by the garden wall. And when we decided that we
should attack, because there was no going back and the killer was taking things too slowly, I showed them
the way into our courtyard. But that’s it. I stopped there. I didn’t take part in the fight. It was Baybars who
attacked, and Irshad and others helped him. And when they panicked, Jackal Head did the rest.
Later on, I lived that moment over and over in my mind so many times that it is hard to tell what part is
real and what part a figment of my imagination. Once or twice I conjured a memory of Shams escaping
from our hands into the pitch-black night, and the image was so vivid I almost believed it.
Though he is gone, there are traces of him everywhere. Dance, poetry, music, and all the things that I
thought would vanish once he was gone have stayed firmly planted in our lives. My father has become a
poet. Shams was right. When one of the jars was broken, so was the other jar.
My father had always been a loving man. He embraced people of all faiths. He was kind toward not
only Muslims but also Christians, Jews, and even pagans. After Shams came into his life, his circle of
love became so vast it included even the most fallen of society—prostitutes, drunks, and beggars, the
scum of the scum.
I believe he could even love Shams’s killers.
There was, and still is, only one person he could not manage to love: his son.
Sultan Walad
KONYA, SEPTEMBER 1248
Beggars, drunks, prostitutes, orphans, and thieves … He distributes all his gold and silver to criminals.
Since that awful night, my father has never been the same. Everyone says he has lost his mind to grief.
When asked what he is doing, he tells the story of Imra’ul-Qays, the king of Arabs, who was very well
liked, notoriously rich and handsome, but one day, unexpectedly, walked out of his perfect life. Qays put
on dervish robes, gave up all his wealth, and from then on wandered from one landscape to another.
“This is what losing your beloved does to you,” my father says. “It dissolves your king-self into dust
and brings out your dervish-self. Now that Shams is gone forever, I am gone, too. I am not a scholar or a
preacher anymore. I am the embodiment of nothingness. Here is my fana, herein my baqa.”
The other day a ginger-haired merchant who looked like the worst liar on earth knocked on our door.
He said he had known Shams of Tabriz way back from his years in Baghdad. Then, dropping his voice to
a confidential whisper, he swore that Shams was alive and well, hiding and meditating in an ashram in
India, waiting for the appropriate time to emerge.
As he said all this, there wasn’t a trace of honesty on his face. But my father got delirious. He asked the
man what he wanted in return for this wonderful news. Without the least bit of shame, the merchant said
that as a young boy he had always wanted to become a dervish, but since life had taken him in another
direction, he would at least love to have the caftan of a scholar as famous as Rumi. Upon hearing this, my
father took out his velvet caftan and handed it to him, just like that.
“But, Father, why did you give your precious caftan to that man when you knew so well that he was
lying?” I inquired as soon as the man was gone.
And this is what my father said: “You think a caftan is too high a price to pay for his lie? But my dear
son, imagine, if he were telling the truth, if Shams were really alive, I would have given my life!”
Rumi
KONYA, OCTOBER 31, 1260
By and large over time, pain turns into grief, grief turns into silence, and silence turns into lonesomeness,
as vast and bottomless as the dark oceans. Today is the sixteenth anniversary of the day Shams and I met
in front of the Inn of Sugar Vendors. Every year on the last day of October, I retreat into a solitude that
grows in weight day by day. I spend forty days in chilla, thinking of the forty rules. I remember and
review each of them, but there in the far reaches of my mind there is only Shams of Tabriz, glittering.
You think you cannot live anymore. You think that the light of your soul has been put out and that you
will stay in the dark forever. But when you are engulfed by such solid darkness, when you have both eyes
closed to the world, a third eye opens in your heart. And only then do you come to realize that eyesight
conflicts with inner knowledge. No eye sees so clear and sharp as the eye of love. After grief comes
another season, another valley, another you. And the lover who is nowhere to be found, you start to see
everywhere.
You see him in the drop of water that falls into the ocean, in the high tide that follows the waxing of the
moon, or in the morning wind that spreads its fresh smell; you see him in the geomancy symbols in the
sand, in the tiny particles of rock glittering under the sun, in the smile of a newborn baby, or in your
throbbing vein. How can you say Shams is gone when he is everywhere and in everything?
Deep in the slow whirling of sorrow and longing, I am with Shams every day, every minute. My chest
is a cave where Shams is resting. Just as a mountain keeps an echo inside itself, I hold the voice of Shams
within. Of the scholar and preacher I once was, not even the smallest speck remains. Love has taken away
all of my practices and habits. Instead it has filled me with poetry. And though I know that there are no
words that can express this inner journey of mine, I believe in words. I am a believer of words.
Two people have helped me through my hardest days: my elder son and a saint named Saladin, the
goldbeater. It was while listening to him work in his small store, beating leaves of gold to perfection, that
I had the most wonderful inspiration to put the final touches to the dance of the whirling dervishes. The
rhythm emanating from Saladin’s store was the same as the pulse of the universe, the divine rhythm Shams
had talked and cared so much about.
In time my elder son married Saladin’s daughter, Fatima. Bright and inquisitive, she reminded me of
Kimya. I taught her the Qur’an. She became so dear to me that I started referring to her as my right eye and
her sister Hediyya as my left eye. That is the one thing dear Kimya proved to me long ago: that girls are
just as good students as boys, if not even better. I arrange sema sessions for women and advise Sufi
sisters to continue this tradition.
Four years ago I began to recite The Mathnawi. The first line came to me one day at dawn apropos of
nothing, while I was watching the sunlight slice the dark. Ever since then the poems spill out of my lips as
if by a force of their own. I do not write them down. It was Saladin who painstakingly wrote out those
early poems. And my son made copies of each. It is thanks to them that the poems survived, because the
truth is, if asked to repeat any one of them today, I don’t think I could. Prose or poetry, the words come to
me in flocks and then leave just as suddenly, like migrating birds. I am only the bed of water where they
stop and rest on their way to warmer lands.
When I start a poem, I never know beforehand what I’m going to say. It could be long or it could be
short. I don’t plan it. And when the poem is over, I’m quiet again. I live in silence. And “Silence,”
Khamush, is one of the two signatures I use in my ghazals. The other one is Shams of Tabriz.
The world has been moving and changing at a speed we human beings can neither control nor
comprehend. In 1258, Baghdad fell to the Mongols. The one city that prided itself on its fortitude and
glamour and claimed to be the center of the world suffered defeat. That same year Saladin died. My
dervishes and I had a huge celebration, passing through the streets with drums and flutes, dancing and
singing in joy, because that is how a saint should be buried.
In 1260 it was the Mongols’ turn to lose. The Mamelukes of Egypt defeated them. Yesterday’s victors
became today’s losers. Every winner is inclined to think he will be triumphant forever. Every loser tends
to fear that he is going to be beaten forever. But both are wrong for the same reason: Everything changes
except the face of God.
After the death of Saladin, Husam the Student, who has matured so fast and so well along the spiritual
path that he is now called Husam Chelebi by everyone, helped me to write down the poems. He is the
scribe to whom I dictated the entire Mathnawi. Modest and generous, if anyone asks Husam who he is or
what he does, without missing a beat he says, “I am a humble follower of Shams of Tabriz. That’s who I
am.”
Little by little, one turns forty, fifty, and sixty and, with each major decade, feels more complete. You
need to keep walking, though there’s no place to arrive at. The universe is turning, constantly and
relentlessly, and so are the earth and the moon, but it is nothing other than a secret embedded within us
human beings that makes it all move. With that knowledge we dervishes will dance our way through love
and heartbreak even if no one understands what we are doing. We will dance in the middle of a brawl or
a major war, all the same. We will dance in our hurt and grief, with joy and elation, alone and together, as
slow and fast as the flow of water. We will dance in our blood. There is a perfect harmony and subtle
balance in all that is and was in the universe. The dots change constantly and replace one another, but the
circle remains intact. Rule Number Thirty-nine: While the parts change, the whole always remains the
same. For every thief who departs this world, a new one is born. And every decent person who passes
away is replaced by a new one. In this way not only does nothing remain the same but also nothing
ever really changes.
For every Sufi who dies, another is born somewhere.
Our religion is the religion of love. And we are all connected in a chain of hearts. If and when one of
the links is broken, another one is added elsewhere. For every Shams of Tabriz who has passed away,
there will emerge a new one in a different age, under a different name.
Names change, they come and go, but the essence remains the same.
Ella
KONYA, SEPTEMBER 7, 2009
By his bed she was sleeping on a plastic chair when she suddenly opened her eyes and listened to an
unexpected sound. Somebody was saying unknown words in the dark. She realized it was the call to
prayer coming from outside. A new day was about to begin. But she had a feeling it would also be the end
of something.
Ask anyone who has heard the call to morning prayer for the first time and he will tell you the same
thing. That it is beautiful, rich, and mysterious. And yet at the same time there is something uncanny about
it, almost eerie. Just like love.
In the stillness of the night, it was to this sound that Ella woke with a start. She blinked repeatedly in
the dark until she could make sense of the male voice filling the room from the open windows. It took her
a full minute to remember that she was not in Massachusetts anymore. This wasn’t the spacious house she
had shared with her husband and three children. All that belonged to another time—a time so distant and
vague that it felt like a fairy tale, not like her own past.
No, she wasn’t in Massachusetts. Instead she was in another part of the world altogether, in a hospital
in the town of Konya in Turkey. And the man whose deep, steady breathing she now heard as an undertone
to the call for the morning prayer was not her husband of twenty years but the lover for whom she had left
him one sunny day last summer.
“Are you going to leave your husband for a man with no future?” her friends and neighbors had asked
her again and again. “And how about your kids? Do you think they will ever forgive you?”
And that is how Ella had come to understand that if there was anything worse in the eyes of society than
a woman abandoning her husband for another man, it was a woman abandoning her future for the present
moment.
She switched on the table lamp and in its soft amber glow inspected the room, as if to make sure
nothing had changed since she’d drifted off to sleep only a few hours ago. It was the smallest hospital
room she had ever seen, not that she’d seen many hospital rooms in her life. The bed occupied most of the
floor space. Everything else was placed in relation to the bed—a wooden closet, a square coffee table, an
extra chair, an empty vase, a bed tray with pills of varying colors, and next to it the book Aziz had been
reading since the beginning of this trip: Me & Rumi.
They had come to Konya four days ago, spending the first days in the city being no different from the
average tourists—visiting monuments, museums, and archaeological sites; stuffing themselves with the
local dishes; and taking pictures of every new thing, no matter how ordinary or silly. Everything was
going well until the day before, when Aziz, while having lunch at a restaurant, collapsed on the floor and
had to be rushed to the nearest hospital. Since then she’d been waiting here by his bedside, waiting
without knowing what to expect, hoping against hope, and at the same time silently and desperately
quarreling with God for taking back so soon the love he had given her so late in life.
“My dear, are you sleeping?” Ella asked. It wasn’t her intention to disturb him, but she needed him
awake.
There came no answer other than a fleeting lull in the rhythm of his breathing, a missing note in the
sequence.
“Are you awake?” she asked, whispering and raising her voice at the same time.
“I am now,” Aziz said slowly. “What is it, you couldn’t sleep?”
“The morning prayer … ” Ella said, and paused as if that explained everything: his deteriorating health,
her growing fear of losing him, and the absolute folly that love was—everything encapsulated by those
three words.
Aziz sat straight up now, his green eyes unblinking. Under the wispy light of the lamp and surrounded
by bleached white sheets, his handsome face looked sadly pale, but there was also something powerful
about it, even immortal.
“The morning prayer is special,” he murmured. “Did you know that of the five prayers a Muslim is
supposed to perform every day, the one in the morning is said to be the most sacred but also the most
testing?”
“And why is that?”
“I guess it’s because it wakes us up from dreams, and we don’t like that. We prefer to keep sleeping.
That’s why there is a line in the morning call that doesn’t exist in the others. It says, ‘Prayer is better than
sleep.’ ”
But perhaps sleep is better for the two of us, Ella thought. If only we could fall asleep together. She
longed for an easy, unperturbed slumber no less magical than Sleeping Beauty’s, one hundred years of
absolute numbness to ease this pain.
In a little while, the call to prayer came to an end, its echoes drifting away on retreating waves. After
the last note faded, the world felt strangely safe, but unbearably silent. It had been a year since they’d
been together. One year of love and awareness. Most of the time, Aziz had been well enough to keep
traveling with Ella, but in the past two weeks his health had deteriorated visibly.
Ella watched him go back to sleep, his face serene and so very dear. Her mind filled with anxieties.
She sighed deeply and walked out of the room. She passed through corridors where all the walls had been
painted shades of green and entered wards where she saw patients, old and young, men and women, some
recovering, others failing. She tried not to mind the inquisitive gaze of the people, but her blond hair and
blue eyes made her foreignness incandescent. She had never felt so out of place anywhere before. But then
Ella had never been much of a traveler.
A few minutes later, she was sitting by the water fountain in the hospital’s small, pleasant garden. In the
middle of the fountain, there was a statue of a little angel, and at the bottom of it a few silver coins shone,
each bearing somebody’s secret wish. She groped in her pockets for a coin but couldn’t find anything
there other than scribbled notes and half a granola bar. As her gaze fell upon the garden, she saw some
pebbles ahead. Smooth, black, and shiny. She picked one of them up, closed her eyes, and tossed it into
the fountain, her lips murmuring a wish she already knew would not be realized. The pebble hit the wall
of the fountain and bounced aside, falling right into the lap of the stone angel.
If Aziz were here, Ella thought, he would have seen it as a sign.
When she walked back half an hour later, she found a doctor and a young, head-scarved nurse in the
room and the bedsheet pulled over Aziz’s head.
He had passed away.
Aziz was buried in Konya, following in the footsteps of his beloved Rumi.
Ella took care of all the preparations, trying to plan every little detail but also trusting that God would
help her with the ones she couldn’t handle. First she arranged the spot where he would be buried—under
a huge magnolia tree in an old Muslim cemetery. Then she found Sufi musicians who agreed to play the
ney and sent an e-mail to Aziz’s friends everywhere, inviting them to the funeral. To her delight, quite a
number of them were able to come, from as far away as Cape Town, St. Petersburg, Murshidabad, and
São Paulo. Among them were photographers like him, as well as scholars, journalists, writers, dancers,
sculptors, businessmen, farmers, housewives, and Aziz’s adopted children.
It was a warm, joyful ceremony, attended by people of all faiths. They celebrated his death, as they
knew he would have wanted. Children played happily and unattended. A Mexican poet distributed pan de
los muertos, and an old Scottish friend of Aziz’s sprinkled rose petals on everyone, raining over them
like confetti, each and every one a colorful testimony that death was not something to be afraid of. One of
the locals, a hunched old Muslim man who watched the whole scene with a wide grin and gimlet eyes,
said this must have been the craziest funeral Konya had ever witnessed, except for the funeral of Mawlana
centuries ago.
Two days after the funeral, finally alone, Ella wandered the city, watching the families walk past her,
merchants in their shops, and street vendors eager to sell her something, anything. People stared at this
American woman walking in their midst with her eyes swollen from crying. She was a complete stranger
here, a complete stranger everywhere.
Back in the hotel, before she checked out and headed to the airport, Ella took off her jacket and put on a
fluffy, peach-colored angora sweater. A color too meek and docile for a woman who’s trying to be
neither, she thought. Then she called Jeannette, who was the only one of her three children who had
supported her in her decision to follow her heart. Orly and Avi were still not speaking to their mother.
“Mom! How are you?” Jeannette asked, her voice full of warmth.
Ella leaned forward into empty space and smiled as if her daughter were standing right across from
her. Then she said in an almost inaudible voice, “Aziz is dead.”
“Oh, Mom, I’m so sorry.”
There was a brief lull as they both contemplated what to say. It was Jeannette who broke the silence.
“Mom, will you be coming home now?”
Ella tipped her head in thought. In her daughter’s question, she heard another unstated question. Would
she be going back to Northampton to her husband and stopping the divorce process, which had already
turned into a maze of mutual resentments and accusations? What was she going to do now? She didn’t
have any money, and she didn’t have a job. But she could always give private lessons in English, work
for a magazine, or who knows, be a good fiction editor one day.
Closing her eyes for a moment, Ella prophesied to herself with jubilant conviction and confidence what
the days ahead would bring her. She had never been on her own like this before, and yet, oddly enough,
she didn’t feel lonely.
“I’ve missed you, baby,” she said. “And I’ve missed your brother and sister, too. Will you come to see
me?”
“Of course I will, Mama—we will—but what are you going to do now? Are you sure you aren’t
coming back?”
“I’m going to Amsterdam,” Ella said. “They have incredibly cute little flats there, overlooking the
canals. I can rent one of those. I’ll need to improve my biking. I don’t know.… I’m not going to make
plans, honey. I’m going to try living one day at a time. I’ll see what my heart says. It is one of the rules,
isn’t it?”
“What rules, Mom? What are you talking about?”
Ella approached the window and looked at the sky, which was an amazing indigo in all directions. It
swirled with an invisible speed of its own, dissolving into nothingness and encountering therein infinite
possibilities, like a whirling dervish.
“It’s Rule Number Forty,” she said slowly. “A life without love is of no account. Don’t ask yourself
what kind of love you should seek, spiritual or material, divine or mundane, Eastern or Western.…
Divisions only lead to more divisions. Love has no labels, no definitions. It is what it is, pure and
simple.
“Love is the water of life. And a lover is a soul of fire!
“
Th
e
u
n
i
v
e
r
s
e
t
u
r
n
s
d
i
ffe
r
e
n
t
ly
w
h
e
n
fi
r
e
l
o
v
e
s
w
a
t
e
r.”
Acknowledgments
Dost means “friend” in Turkish. I owe a bigger debt of gratitude than I can ever express to friends
everywhere—Istanbul, Amsterdam, Berlin, and London. Many people inspired this novel with their
stories and silences. I am deeply grateful to Marly Rusoff, my literary agent, who has believed in me from
day one and has always seen through me with that third eye of hers. Thank you to dear Michael Radulescu
for his continuing support and faith, and for just being there when I need help. I am indebted to my editor,
Paul Slovak, for his many valuable contributions and inner wisdom, as well as for his indispensable
suggestions as the manuscript traveled between Istanbul and New York.
I owe a special thanks to Sufis all around the world, those I have met in the past and those I have yet to
meet, carrying perhaps different names and passports, but always the same amazing ability to see things
from two points of view, their own and that of another. Thank you, dear Zeynep, Emir, Hande, and Beyza,
for your time, patience, amity, and precious contributions. My heartfelt thanks to Mercan Dede for his
generous heart and unique friendship.
Finally, to Eyup and my children, I thank you for showing me, a nomadic soul, that it was possible to
settle down in one place and still be free. This book owes you more than I can tell.
Glossary
baqa: permanency that comes after annihilation, a higher state of life with God
baraqa: blessing
dervish: someone who is on the Sufi path
fana: annihilation of the Self while physically alive
faqih: a scholar of law
faqir: a Sufi practicing spiritual poverty
ghazal: a type of poetry common in Indo-Perso-Arabic civilization
hadith: the words and deeds of the Prophet Muhammad
hafiz: a person who has memorized the Qur’an
hamam: Turkish bath
Insan-i Kâmil: the perfect human being according to Sufism; the stage is genderless and is thus reachable
for both men and women
inshallah: “if Allah wills it”
khaneqah: a center for dervishes
kismet: luck, fortune
kudüm and rebab: musical instruments
lokum: Turkish delight
madrassa: college, school where students are educated in a wide range of fields
maktab: elementary school
maqamat: stages of development
nafs: false ego
ney: a reed flute played mostly by Malawi dervishes
qibla: the direction Muslims face for daily prayers
salwar: loose pants
saqui: one who serves wine
sema: the spiritual dance of whirling dervishes
semazenbashi: a dance master
Shafi, Hanefi, Hanbali, and Maliki: the four schools of law of Sunni Islam
sharia: 1. a set of Islamic laws and regulations; 2. the mainstream; main venue
tafsir: interpretation or commentary, usually of the Qur’an
Tahafut al-Tahafut: The Incoherence of the Incoherence, by Averroës, in which the author defends
Aristotelian philosophy in Islamic thought
tariqa: a Sufi order, or the way, the mystical path
tasbih: a rosary
zikr: remembrance of God
Sources
While writing this novel I benefited greatly from my readings of the Mathnawi by R. A. Nicholson and
The Autobiography of Shams-i Tabrizi by William Chittick. I am indebted to the works of William
Chittick, Coleman Barks, Idris Shah, Kabir Helminski, Camille Helminski, Refik Algan, Franklin D.
Lewis, and Annemarie Schimmel.
The poems by Rumi were from the following sources:
William Chittick, The Sufi Path of Love, Albany: State University of New York, 1983
Coleman Barks, A Year with Rumi, New York: Harper Collins, 2006, and The Essential Rumi, 1995
Kabir Helminski, The Rumi Collection, Boston: Shambhala Publications, 2005
Poems by Omar Khayyám from Richard Le Gallienne’s translation as found on
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rubaiyat_of_Omar_Khayyám
Of the two translations of the verse Nisa, the first is by M. H. Shakir (The Qur’an, translated by M. H.
Shakir, 1993), the second is by Ahmed Ali (Al-Qur’an: A Contemporary Translation, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 2001)


 Page semi-protected
France
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"La France" redirects here. For other uses of "La France", see Lafrance (disambiguation). For other uses of "France", see France (disambiguation).
French Republic
République française (French)
Flag of France
Flag
Emblem of France
Emblem
Motto: "Liberté, égalité, fraternité"
"Liberty, Equality, Fraternity"
Anthem: "La Marseillaise" 
MENU0:00
 EU-France.svg
Show map of Europe
Show globe
Show all
Location of  metropolitan France  (dark green)
– in Europe  (green & dark grey)
– in the European Union  (green)

Location of the territory of the French Republic (red)Adélie Land (Antarctic claim; hatched)
Location of the territory of the French Republic (red)
Adélie Land (Antarctic claim; hatched)
Capital
and largest city	Paris
48°51'N 2°21'E
Official language
and national language	French[I]
Nationality (2010)	
89.4% French (born)
4.4% French (by acquisition)
6.2% Foreigners
8.9% Immigrants[1]
(Maghrebis, Africans, Other Europeans, Asians, Turks, Americans)
Religion (2016)	
51.1% Christian
39.6% Irreligious
5.6% Muslim
0.8% Judaism
2.5% other faiths[2]
Demonym	French
Government	Unitary semi-presidential constitutional republic
• President
Emmanuel Macron
• Prime Minister
Édouard Philippe
• President of the Senate
Gérard Larcher
• President of the National Assembly
François de Rugy
Legislature	Parliament
• Upper house
Senate
• Lower house
National Assembly
Establishment
• Francia unified
486
• Treaty of Verdun[II]
August 843
• Republic established
22 September 1792
• Founded the EEC[III]
1 January 1958
• Current constitution[IV]
4 October 1958
Area
• Total
640,679 km2 (247,368 sq mi)[3] (42nd)
• Metropolitan France (IGN)
551,695 km2 (213,011 sq mi)[V] (50th)
• Metropolitan France (Cadastre)
543,940.9 km2 (210,016.8 sq mi)[VI][4] (50th)
Population
• 2017 estimate
Increase 67,201,000[5] (21st)
• Density
104/km2 (270/sq mi) (106th)
• Metropolitan France, estimate as of December 2017	Increase 65,058,000[6] (22nd)
• Density
116/km2 (300.4/sq mi) (89th)
GDP (PPP)	2017 estimate
• Total
$2.826 trillion[7] (10th)
• Per capita
$43,550[7] (26th)
GDP (nominal)	2017 estimate
• Total
$2.574 trillion[7] (5th)
• Per capita
$39,673[7] (22nd)
Gini (2013)	30.1[8]
medium
HDI (2015)	Increase 0.897[9]
very high · 21st
Currency	
Euro (EUR)[VII]
CFP franc (XPF)[VIII]
Time zone	Central European Time (UTC+1)
• Summer (DST)
Central European Summer Time[X] (UTC+2)
Note: various other time zones are observed in overseas France.[IX]
Date format	dd/mm/yyyy (AD)
Drives on the	right
Calling code	+33[XI]
ISO 3166 code	FR
Internet TLD	.fr[XII]
Source gives area of metropolitan France as 551,500 km2 (212,900 sq mi) and lists overseas regions separately, whose areas sum to 89,179 km2 (34,432 sq mi). Adding these give the total shown here for the entire French Republic. The CIA reports the total as 643,801 km2 (248,573 sq mi).
France (French IPA: [f??~s]), officially the French Republic (French: République française [?epyblik f??~s?z]), is a country whose territory consists of metropolitan France in western Europe, as well as several overseas regions and territories.[XIII] The metropolitan area of France extends from the Mediterranean Sea to the English Channel and the North Sea, and from the Rhine to the Atlantic Ocean. The overseas territories include French Guiana in South America and several islands in the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian oceans. The country's 18 integral regions (five of which are situated overseas) span a combined area of 643,801 square kilometres (248,573 sq mi) which, as of October 2017, has a population of 67.15 million people.[10] France is a unitary semi-presidential republic with its capital in Paris, the country's largest city and main cultural and commercial centre. Other major urban centres include Marseille, Lyon, Lille, Nice, Toulouse and Bordeaux.

During the Iron Age, what is now metropolitan France was inhabited by the Gauls, a Celtic people. Rome annexed the area in 51 BC, and held the region until 486, when the Germanic Franks conquered the region and formed the Kingdom of France. France emerged as a major European power in the Late Middle Ages following its victory in the Hundred Years' War (1337 to 1453). During the Renaissance, French culture flourished and a global colonial empire was established, which by the 20th century would be the second largest in the world.[11] The 16th century was dominated by religious civil wars between Catholics and Protestants (Huguenots). France became Europe's dominant cultural, political, and military power under Louis XIV.[12] In the late 18th century, the French Revolution overthrew the absolute monarchy, established one of modern history's earliest republics, and saw the drafting of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, which expresses the nation's ideals to this day.

In the 19th century Napoleon took power and established the First French Empire, whose subsequent Napoleonic Wars shaped the course of continental Europe. Following the collapse of the Empire, France endured a tumultuous succession of governments culminating with the establishment of the French Third Republic in 1870. France was a major participant in World War I, from which it emerged victorious, and was one of the Allied Powers in World War II, but came under occupation by the Axis powers in 1940. Following liberation in 1944, a Fourth Republic was established and later dissolved in the course of the Algerian War. The Fifth Republic, led by Charles de Gaulle, was formed in 1958 and remains to this day. Algeria and nearly all the other colonies became independent in the 1960s and typically retained close economic and military connections with France.

France has long been a global centre of art, science, and philosophy. It hosts Europe's third-largest number of cultural UNESCO World Heritage Sites and receives around 83 million foreign tourists annually, the most of any country in the world.[13] France is a developed country with the world's fifth-largest economy by nominal GDP[14] and ninth-largest by purchasing power parity.[15] In terms of aggregate household wealth, it ranks fourth in the world.[16] France performs well in international rankings of education, health care, life expectancy, and human development.[17][18] France remains a great power in the world,[19] being one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council with the power to veto and an official nuclear-weapon state. It is a leading member state of the European Union and the Eurozone.[20] It is also a member of the Group of 7, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the World Trade Organization (WTO), and La Francophonie.

Contents  [hide] 
1	Etymology
2	History
2.1	Prehistory (before the 6th century BC)
2.2	Antiquity (6th century BC–5th century AD)
2.3	Early Middle Ages (5th century–10th century)
2.4	Late Middle Ages (10th century–15th century)
2.5	Early modern period (15th century–1789)
2.6	Revolutionary France (1789–1799)
2.7	Napoleon and 19th century (1799–1914)
2.8	Contemporary period (1914–present)
3	Geography
3.1	Location and borders
3.2	Climate
3.3	Environment
3.4	Geology, topography and hydrography
3.5	Administrative divisions
4	Politics
4.1	Government
4.2	Law
4.3	Foreign relations
4.4	Military
4.5	Government finance
5	Economy
5.1	Agriculture
5.2	Tourism
5.3	Energy
5.4	Transport
5.5	Science and technology
6	Demographics
6.1	Ethnic groups
6.2	Major cities
6.3	Functional urban areas
6.4	Language
6.5	Religion
6.6	Health
6.7	Education
7	Culture
7.1	Art
7.2	Architecture
7.3	Literature
7.4	Philosophy
7.5	Music
7.6	Cinema
7.7	Fashion
7.8	Media
7.9	Society
7.10	Cuisine
7.11	Sports
8	See also
9	Footnotes
10	References
11	External links
Etymology
Main article: Name of France
Originally applied to the whole Frankish Empire, the name "France" comes from the Latin Francia, or "country of the Franks".[21] Modern France is still named today Francia in Italian and Spanish, Frankreich in German and Frankrijk in Dutch, all of which have the same historical meaning.

There are various theories as to the origin of the name Frank. Following the precedents of Edward Gibbon and Jacob Grimm,[22] the name of the Franks has been linked with the word frank (free) in English.[23] It has been suggested that the meaning of "free" was adopted because, after the conquest of Gaul, only Franks were free of taxation.[24] Another theory is that it is derived from the Proto-Germanic word frankon, which translates as javelin or lance as the throwing axe of the Franks was known as a francisca.[25] However, it has been determined that these weapons were named because of their use by the Franks, not the other way around.[26]

History
Main article: History of France
Prehistory (before the 6th century BC)
Main article: Prehistory of France
Lascaux cave paintings: a horse from Dordogne facing right brown on white background
One of the Lascaux paintings: a horse – Dordogne, approximately 18,000 BC.
The oldest traces of human life in what is now France date from approximately 1.8 million years ago.[27] Humans were then confronted by a harsh and variable climate, marked by several glacial eras. Early homonids led a nomadic hunter-gatherer life.[27] France has a large number of decorated caves from the upper Palaeolithic era, including one of the most famous and best preserved: Lascaux[27] (approximately 18,000 BC).

At the end of the last glacial period (10,000 BC), the climate became milder;[27] from approximately 7,000 BC, this part of Western Europe entered the Neolithic era and its inhabitants became sedentary. After strong demographic and agricultural development between the 4th and 3rd millennia, metallurgy appeared at the end of the 3rd millennium, initially working gold, copper and bronze, and later iron.[28] France has numerous megalithic sites from the Neolithic period, including the exceptionally dense Carnac stones site (approximately 3,300 BC).

Antiquity (6th century BC–5th century AD)
Main articles: Gaul, Celts, and Roman Gaul
In 600 BC, Ionian Greeks, originating from Phocaea, founded the colony of Massalia (present-day Marseille), on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea. This makes it France's oldest city.[29][30] At the same time, some Gallic Celtic tribes penetrated parts of the current territory of France, and this occupation spread to the rest of France between the 5th and 3rd century BC.[31]

Maison Carrée temple in Nemausus Corinthian columns and portico
The Maison Carrée was a temple of the Gallo-Roman city of Nemausus (present-day Nîmes) and is one of the best-preserved vestiges of the Roman Empire.
The concept of Gaul emerged at that time; it corresponds to the territories of Celtic settlement ranging between the Rhine, the Atlantic Ocean, the Pyrenees and the Mediterranean. The borders of modern France are roughly the same as those of ancient Gaul, which was inhabited by Celtic Gauls. Gaul was then a prosperous country, of which the southernmost part was heavily subject to Greek and Roman cultural and economic influences.

Around 390 BC the Gallic chieftain Brennus and his troops made their way to Italy through the Alps, defeated the Romans in the Battle of the Allia, and besieged and ransomed Rome. The Gallic invasion left Rome weakened, and the Gauls continued to harass the region until 345 BC when they entered into a formal peace treaty with Rome. But the Romans and the Gauls would remain adversaries for the next several centuries, and the Gauls would continue to be a threat in Italia.

Around 125 BC, the south of Gaul was conquered by the Romans, who called this region Provincia Nostra ("Our Province"), which over time evolved into the name Provence in French.[32] Julius Caesar conquered the remainder of Gaul and overcame a revolt carried out by the Gallic chieftain Vercingetorix in 52 BC.[33] Gaul was divided by Augustus into Roman provinces.[34] Many cities were founded during the Gallo-Roman period, including Lugdunum (present-day Lyon), which is considered the capital of the Gauls.[34] These cities were built in traditional Roman style, with a forum, a theatre, a circus, an amphitheatre and thermal baths. The Gauls mixed with Roman settlers and eventually adopted Roman culture and Roman speech (Latin, from which the French language evolved). The Roman polytheism merged with the Gallic paganism into the same syncretism.

From the 250s to the 280s AD, Roman Gaul suffered a serious crisis with its fortified borders being attacked on several occasions by barbarians.[35] Nevertheless, the situation improved in the first half of the 4th century, which was a period of revival and prosperity for Roman Gaul.[36] In 312, the emperor Constantin I converted to Christianity. Subsequently, Christians, who had been persecuted until then, increased rapidly across the entire Roman Empire.[37] But, from the beginning of the 5th century, the Barbarian Invasions resumed,[38] and Germanic tribes, such as the Vandals, Suebi and Alans crossed the Rhine and settled in Gaul, Spain and other parts of the collapsing Roman Empire.[39]

Early Middle Ages (5th century–10th century)
Main articles: Francia, Merovingian dynasty, and Carolingian dynasty
See also: List of French monarchs and France in the Middle Ages
animated gif showing expansion of Franks across Europe
Frankish expansion from 481 to 843/870.
At the end of the Antiquity period, ancient Gaul was divided into several Germanic kingdoms and a remaining Gallo-Roman territory, known as the Kingdom of Syagrius. Simultaneously, Celtic Britons, fleeing the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain, settled the western part of Armorica. As a result, the Armorican peninsula was renamed Brittany, Celtic culture was revived and independent petty kingdoms arose in this region.

painting of Clovis I conversion to Catholicism in 498, a king being baptized in a tub in a cathedral surrounded by bishop and monks
With Clovis's conversion to Catholicism in 498, the Frankish monarchy, elective and secular until then, became hereditary and of divine right.
The pagan Franks, from whom the ancient name of "Francie" was derived, originally settled the north part of Gaul, but under Clovis I conquered most of the other kingdoms in northern and central Gaul. In 498, Clovis I was the first Germanic conqueror after the fall of the Roman Empire to convert to Catholic Christianity, rather than Arianism; thus France was given the title "Eldest daughter of the Church" (French: La fille aînée de l'Église) by the papacy,[40] and French kings would be called "the Most Christian Kings of France" (Rex Christianissimus).

The Franks embraced the Christian Gallo-Roman culture and ancient Gaul was eventually renamed Francia ("Land of the Franks"). The Germanic Franks adopted Romanic languages, except in northern Gaul where Roman settlements were less dense and where Germanic languages emerged. Clovis made Paris his capital and established the Merovingian dynasty, but his kingdom would not survive his death. The Franks treated land purely as a private possession and divided it among their heirs, so four kingdoms emerged from Clovis's: Paris, Orléans, Soissons, and Rheims. The last Merovingian kings lost power to their mayors of the palace (head of household). One mayor of the palace, Charles Martel, defeated an Islamic invasion of Gaul at the Battle of Tours (732) and earned respect and power within the Frankish kingdoms. His son, Pepin the Short, seized the crown of Francia from the weakened Merovingians and founded the Carolingian dynasty. Pepin's son, Charlemagne, reunited the Frankish kingdoms and built a vast empire across Western and Central Europe.

Proclaimed Holy Roman Emperor by Pope Leo III and thus establishing in earnest the French government's longtime historical association with the Catholic Church,[41] Charlemagne tried to revive the Western Roman Empire and its cultural grandeur. Charlemagne's son, Louis I (emperor 814–840), kept the empire united; however, this Carolingian Empire would not survive his death. In 843, under the Treaty of Verdun, the empire was divided between Louis' three sons, with East Francia going to Louis the German, Middle Francia to Lothair I, and West Francia to Charles the Bald. West Francia approximated the area occupied by, and was the precursor, to modern France.[42]

During the 9th and 10th centuries, continually threatened by Viking invasions, France became a very decentralised state: the nobility's titles and lands became hereditary, and the authority of the king became more religious than secular and thus was less effective and constantly challenged by powerful noblemen. Thus was established feudalism in France. Over time, some of the king's vassals would grow so powerful that they often posed a threat to the king. For example, after the Battle of Hastings in 1066, William the Conqueror added "King of England" to his titles, becoming both the vassal to (as Duke of Normandy) and the equal of (as king of England) the king of France, creating recurring tensions.

Late Middle Ages (10th century–15th century)
Main articles: Kingdom of France, Capetian dynasty, Valois dynasty, and Bourbon dynasty
See also: List of French monarchs and France in the Middle Ages
Joan of Arc in plate armor holding sword facing left with gilded background
Joan of Arc led the French army to several important victories during the Hundred Years' War, which paved the way for the final victory.
animated gif showing changes in French borders
French territorial evolution from 985 to 1947.
The Carolingian dynasty ruled France until 987, when Hugh Capet, Duke of France and Count of Paris, was crowned King of the Franks.[43] His descendants—the Capetians, the House of Valois, and the House of Bourbon—progressively unified the country through wars and dynastic inheritance into the Kingdom of France, which was fully declared in 1190 by Philip II Augustus. The French nobility played a prominent role in most Crusades in order to restore Christian access to the Holy Land. French knights made up the bulk of the steady flow of reinforcements throughout the two-hundred-year span of the Crusades, in such a fashion that the Arabs uniformly referred to the crusaders as Franj caring little whether they really came from France.[44] The French Crusaders also imported the French language into the Levant, making French the base of the lingua franca (litt. "Frankish language") of the Crusader states.[44] French knights also comprised the majority in both the Hospital and the Temple orders. The latter, in particular, held numerous properties throughout France and by the 13th century were the principal bankers for the French crown, until Philip IV annihilated the order in 1307. The Albigensian Crusade was launched in 1209 to eliminate the heretical Cathars in the southwestern area of modern-day France. In the end, the Cathars were exterminated and the autonomous County of Toulouse was annexed into the crown lands of France.[45] Later kings expanded their domain to cover over half of modern continental France, including most of the north, centre and west of France. Meanwhile, the royal authority became more and more assertive, centred on a hierarchically conceived society distinguishing nobility, clergy, and commoners.

Charles IV the Fair died without an heir in 1328.[46] Under the rules of the Salic law the crown of France could not pass to a woman nor could the line of kingship pass through the female line.[46] Accordingly, the crown passed to Philip of Valois, a cousin of Charles, rather than through the female line to Charles' nephew, Edward, who would soon become Edward III of England. During the reign of Philip of Valois, the French monarchy reached the height of its medieval power.[46] Philip's seat on the throne was contested by Edward III of England and in 1337, on the eve of the first wave of the Black Death,[47] England and France went to war in what would become known as the Hundred Years' War.[48] The exact boundaries changed greatly with time, but French landholdings of the English Kings remained extensive for decades. With charismatic leaders, such as Joan of Arc and La Hire, strong French counterattacks won back English continental territories. Like the rest of Europe, France was struck by the Black Death; half of the 17 million population of France died.[49][50]

Early modern period (15th century–1789)
Main articles: French Renaissance (c. 1400–c. 1650), Early modern France (1500–1789), French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) and Ancien Régime (c. 1400–1792)
painting of St. Bartholomew's Day massacre, convent church of the Grands-Augustins, the Seine and the bridge of the Millers, in the center, the Louvre and Catherine de' Medici.
The St. Bartholomew's Day massacre (1572) was the climax of the French Wars of Religion, which were brought to an end by the Edict of Nantes (1598).
The French Renaissance saw a spectacular cultural development and the first standardisation of the French language, which would become the official language of France and the language of Europe's aristocracy. It also saw a long set of wars, known as the Italian Wars, between the Kingdom of France and the powerful Holy Roman Empire. French explorers, such as Jacques Cartier or Samuel de Champlain, claimed lands in the Americas for France, paving the way for the expansion of the First French colonial empire. The rise of Protestantism in Europe led France to a civil war known as the French Wars of Religion, where, in the most notorious incident, thousands of Huguenots were murdered in the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre of 1572.[51] The Wars of Religion were ended by Henry IV's Edict of Nantes, which granted some freedom of religion to the Huguenots.

Under Louis XIII, the energetic Cardinal Richelieu promoted the centralisation of the state and reinforced the royal power by disarming domestic power holders in the 1620s. He systematically destroyed castles of defiant lords and denounced the use of private violence (dueling, carrying weapons, and maintaining private army). By the end of 1620s, Richelieu established "the royal monopoly of force" as the doctrine.[52] During Louis XIV's minority and the regency of Queen Anne and Cardinal Mazarin, a period of trouble known as the Fronde occurred in France, which was at that time at war with Spain. This rebellion was driven by the great feudal lords and sovereign courts as a reaction to the rise of royal absolute power in France.

Louis XIV of France standing in plate armor and blue sash facing left holding baton
Louis XIV, the "sun king" was the absolute monarch of France and made France the leading European power.
The monarchy reached its peak during the 17th century and the reign of Louis XIV. By turning powerful feudal lords into courtiers at the Palace of Versailles, Louis XIV's personal power became unchallenged. Remembered for his numerous wars, he made France the leading European power. France became the most populous country in Europe and had tremendous influence over European politics, economy, and culture. French became the most-used language in diplomacy, science, literature and international affairs, and remained so until the 20th century.[53] France obtained many overseas possessions in the Americas, Africa and Asia. Louis XIV also revoked the Edict of Nantes, forcing thousands of Huguenots into exile.

Under Louis XV, Louis XIV's great-grandson, France lost New France and most of its Indian possessions after its defeat in the Seven Years' War, which ended in 1763. Its European territory kept growing, however, with notable acquisitions such as Lorraine (1766) and Corsica (1770). An unpopular king, Louis XV's weak rule, his ill-advised financial, political and military decisions – as well as the debauchery of his court– discredited the monarchy, which arguably paved the way for the French Revolution 15 years after his death.[54][55]

Louis XVI, Louis XV's grandson, actively supported the Americans, who were seeking their independence from Great Britain (realised in the Treaty of Paris (1783)). The financial crisis that followed France's involvement in the American Revolutionary War was one of many contributing factors to the French Revolution. Much of the Enlightenment occurred in French intellectual circles, and major scientific breakthroughs and inventions, such as the discovery of oxygen (1778) and the first hot air balloon carrying passengers (1783), were achieved by French scientists. French explorers, such as Bougainville and Lapérouse, took part in the voyages of scientific exploration through maritime expeditions around the globe. The Enlightenment philosophy, in which reason is advocated as the primary source for legitimacy and authority, undermined the power of and support for the monarchy and helped pave the way for the French Revolution.

Revolutionary France (1789–1799)
Main articles: History of France § Revolutionary France (1789–1799), and French Revolution
drawing of the Storming of the Bastille on 14 July 1789, smoke of gunfire enveloping stone castle
The Storming of the Bastille on 14 July 1789 was the most emblematic event of the French Revolution.
Facing financial troubles, King Louis XVI summoned the Estates-General (gathering the three Estates of the realm) in May 1789 to propose solutions to his government. As it came to an impasse, the representatives of the Third Estate formed into a National Assembly, signalling the outbreak of the French Revolution. Fearing that the king would suppress the newly created National Assembly, insurgents stormed the Bastille on 14 July 1789, a date which would become France's National Day.

In early August 1789, the National Constituent Assembly abolished the privileges of the nobility such as personal serfdom and exclusive hunting rights. Through the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (27 August 1789) France established fundamental rights for men. The Declaration affirms "the natural and imprescriptible rights of man" to "liberty, property, security and resistance to oppression". Freedom of speech and press were declared, and arbitrary arrests outlawed. It called for the destruction of aristocratic privileges and proclaimed freedom and equal rights for all men, as well as access to public office based on talent rather than birth.

In November 1789, the Assembly decided to nationalize and sell all property of the Roman Catholic Church which had been the largest landowner in the country. In July 1790, a Civil Constitution of the Clergy reorganised the French Catholic Church, cancelling the authority of the Church to levy taxes, et cetera. This fueled much discontent in parts of France, which would contribute to the civil war breaking out some years later. While King Louis XVI still enjoyed popularity among the population, his disastrous flight to Varennes (June 1791) seemed to justify rumours he had tied his hopes of political salvation to the prospects of foreign invasion. His credibility was so deeply undermined that the abolition of the monarchy and establishment of a republic became an increasing possibility.

In August 1791, the Emperor of Austria and the King of Prussia in the Declaration of Pillnitz threatened revolutionary France to intervene by force of arms to restore the French absolute monarchy. In September 1791, the National Constituent Assembly forced King Louis XVI to accept the French Constitution of 1791, thus turning the French absolute monarchy into a constitutional monarchy. In the newly established Legislative Assembly (October 1791), enmity developed and deepened between a group, later called the 'Girondins', who favored war with Austria and Prussia, and a group later called 'Montagnards' or 'Jacobins', who opposed such a war. But a majority in the Assembly in 1792 saw a war with Austria and Prussia as a chance to boost the popularity of the revolutionary government, and thought that France would win a war against those gathered monarchies. On 20 April 1792, therefore, they declared war on Austria.[XIV]

On 10 August 1792, an angry crowd threatened the palace of King Louis XVI, who took refuge in the Legislative Assembly.[56][57] A Prussian army invaded France later in August 1792. In early September, Parisians, infuriated by the Prussian army capturing Verdun and counter-revolutionary uprisings in the west of France, murdered between 1,000 and 1,500 prisoners by raiding the Parisian prisons. The Assembly and the Paris city council seemed unable to stop that bloodshed.[56][58] The National Convention, chosen in the first elections under male universal suffrage,[56] on 20 September 1792 succeeded the Legislative Assembly and on 21 September abolished the monarchy by proclaiming the French First Republic. Ex-king Louis XVI was convicted of treason and guillotined in January 1793. France had declared war on England and the Dutch Republic in November 1792 and did the same on Spain in March 1793; in the spring of 1793, Austria, Great Britain and the Dutch Republic invaded France; in March, France created a "sister republic" in the "Republic of Mainz".

Also in March 1793, the civil war of the Vendée against Paris started, evoked by both the Civil Constitution of the Clergy of 1790 and the nationwide army conscription early 1793; elsewhere in France rebellion was brewing too. A factionalist feud in the National Convention, smoldering ever since October 1791, came to a climax with the group of the 'Girondins' on 2 June 1793 being forced to resign and leave the Convention. The counter-revolution, begun in March 1793 in the Vendée, by July had spread to Brittany, Normandy, Bordeaux, Marseilles, Toulon, Lyon. Paris' Convention government between October and December 1793 with brutal measures managed to subdue most internal uprisings, at the cost of tens of thousands of lives. Some historians consider the civil war to have lasted until 1796 with a toll of possibly 450,000 lives.[59][60] France in February 1794 abolished slavery in its American colonies, but would reintroduce it later.

Political disagreements and enmity in the National Convention between October 1793 and July 1794 reached unprecedented levels, leading to dozens of Convention members being sentenced to death and guillotined. Meanwhile, France's external wars in 1794 were going prosperous, for example in Belgium. In 1795, the government seemed to return to indifference towards the desires and needs of the lower classes concerning freedom of (Catholic) religion and fair distribution of food. Until 1799, politicians, apart from inventing a new parliamentary system (the 'Directory'), busied themselves with dissuading the people from Catholicism and from royalism.

Napoleon and 19th century (1799–1914)
Main articles: History of France § Napoleonic France (1799–1815); History of France § Long 19th century, 1815–1914; First French Empire; Second French Empire; and French colonial empire
See also: France in the 19th century and France in the 20th century
painting of Napoleon in 1806 standing with hand in vest attended by staff and Imperial guard regiment
Napoleon, Emperor of the French, and his Grande Armée built a vast Empire across Europe. His conquests spread the French revolutionary ideals across much of Europe, such as popular sovereignty, legal equality, republicanism, and administrative reorganization while his legal reforms had a major impact worldwide. Nationalism, especially in Germany, emerged in reaction against him.[61]
Napoleon Bonaparte seized control of the Republic in 1799 becoming First Consul and later Emperor of the French Empire (1804–1814/1815). As a continuation of the wars sparked by the European monarchies against the French Republic, changing sets of European Coalitions declared wars on Napoleon's Empire. His armies conquered most of continental Europe with swift victories such as the battles of Jena-Auerstadt or Austerlitz. Members of the Bonaparte family were appointed as monarchs in some of the newly established kingdoms.[62] These victories led to the worldwide expansion of French revolutionary ideals and reforms, such as the Metric system, the Napoleonic Code and the Declaration of the Rights of Man. After the catastrophic Russian campaign, and the ensuing uprising of European monarchies against his rule, Napoleon was defeated and the Bourbon monarchy restored. About a million Frenchmen died during the Napoleonic Wars.[62]

After his brief return from exile, Napoleon was finally defeated in 1815 at the Battle of Waterloo, the monarchy was re-established (1815–1830), with new constitutional limitations. The discredited Bourbon dynasty was overthrown by the July Revolution of 1830, which established the constitutional July Monarchy, which lasted until 1848, when the French Second Republic was proclaimed, in the wake of the European Revolutions of 1848. The abolition of slavery and male universal suffrage, both briefly enacted during the French Revolution were re-enacted in 1848.

In 1852, the president of the French Republic, Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, Napoleon I's nephew, was proclaimed emperor of the second Empire, as Napoleon III. He multiplied French interventions abroad, especially in Crimea, in Mexico and Italy which resulted in the annexation of the duchy of Savoy and the county of Nice, then part of the Kingdom of Sardinia. Napoleon III was unseated following defeat in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870 and his regime was replaced by the Third Republic.

animated gif of French colonial territory on world map
Animated map of the growth and decline of the French colonial empire.
France had colonial possessions, in various forms, since the beginning of the 17th century, but in the 19th and 20th centuries, its global overseas colonial empire extended greatly and became the second largest in the world behind the British Empire. Including metropolitan France, the total area of land under French sovereignty almost reached 13 million square kilometres in the 1920s and 1930s, 8.6% of the world's land. Known as the Belle Époque, the turn of the century was a period characterised by optimism, regional peace, economic prosperity and technological, scientific and cultural innovations. In 1905, state secularism was officially established.

Contemporary period (1914–present)
Main article: France in the twentieth century
Autochrome of the 114 Infantery regiment in París, on 14 July 1917, with French flag unfurled laying on stacked arms
French poilus sustained the highest number of casualties among the Allies in World War I.
France was a member of the Triple Entente when World War I broke out. A small part of Northern France was occupied, but France and its allies emerged victorious against the Central Powers at a tremendous human and material cost. World War I left 1.4 million French soldiers dead, 4% of its population.[63] Between 27 and 30% of soldiers conscripted from 1912–1915 were killed.[64] The interbellum years were marked by intense international tensions and a variety of social reforms introduced by the Popular Front government (annual leave, eight-hour workdays, women in government, etc...).

Charles de Gaulle seated in uniform looking left with folded arms
Charles de Gaulle took an active part in many major events of the 20th century: a hero of World War I, leader of the Free French during World War II, he then became President, where he facilitated decolonisation, maintained France as a major power and overcame the revolt of May 1968.
In 1940, France was invaded and occupied by Nazi Germany. Metropolitan France was divided into a German occupation zone in the north and Vichy France, a newly established authoritarian regime collaborating with Germany, in the south, while Free France, the government-in-exile led by Charles de Gaulle, was set up in London.[65] From 1942 to 1944, about 160,000 French citizens, including around 75,000 Jews,[66][67][68] were deported to death camps and concentration camps in Germany and occupied Poland.[69] On 6 June 1944 the Allies invaded Normandy and in August they invaded Provence. Over the following year the Allies and the French Resistance emerged victorious over the Axis powers and French sovereignty was restored with the establishment of the Provisional Government of the French Republic (GPRF). This interim government, established by de Gaulle, aimed to continue to wage war against Germany and to purge collaborators from office. It also made several important reforms (suffrage extended to women, creation of a social security system).

The GPRF laid the groundwork for a new constitutional order that resulted in the Fourth Republic, which saw spectacular economic growth (les Trente Glorieuses). France was one of the founding members of NATO (1949). France attempted to regain control of French Indochina but was defeated by the Viet Minh in 1954 at the climactic Battle of Dien Bien Phu. Only months later, France faced another anti-colonialist conflict in Algeria. Torture and illegal executions were perpetrated by both sides and the debate over whether or not to keep control of Algeria, then home to over one million European settlers,[70] wracked the country and nearly led to a coup and civil war.[71]

In 1958, the weak and unstable Fourth Republic gave way to the Fifth Republic, which included a strengthened Presidency.[72] In the latter role, Charles de Gaulle managed to keep the country together while taking steps to end the war. The Algerian War was concluded with the Évian Accords in 1962 that led to Algerian independence. A vestige of the colonial empire are the French overseas departments and territories.

In the context of the Cold War, de Gaulle pursued a policy of "national independence" towards the Western and Eastern blocs. To this end, he withdrew from NATO's military integrated command, he launched a nuclear development programme and made France the fourth nuclear power. He restored cordial Franco-German relations in order to create a European counterweight between the American and Soviet spheres of influence. However, he opposed any development of a supranational Europe, favouring a Europe of sovereign Nations. In the wake of the series of worldwide protests of 1968, the revolt of May 1968 had an enormous social impact. In France, it is considered to be the watershed moment when a conservative moral ideal (religion, patriotism, respect for authority) shifted towards a more liberal moral ideal (secularism, individualism, sexual revolution). Although the revolt was a political failure (as the Gaullist party emerged even stronger than before) it announced a split between the French people and de Gaulle who resigned shortly after.

Place de la République statue column with large French flag
Republican march, Place de la République, Paris.
In the post-Gaullist era, France remained one of the most developed economies in the World, but faced several economic crises that resulted in high unemployment rates and increasing public debt. In the late 20th and early 21st centuries France has been at the forefront of the development of a supranational European Union, notably by signing the Maastricht Treaty (which created the European Union) in 1992, establishing the Eurozone in 1999, and signing the Lisbon Treaty in 2007.[73] France has also gradually but fully reintegrated into NATO and has since participated in most NATO sponsored wars.[74]

Since the 19th century France has received many immigrants. These have been mostly male foreign workers from European Catholic countries who generally returned home when not employed.[75] During the 1970s France faced economic crisis and allowed new immigrants (mostly from the Maghreb[75]) to permanently settle in France with their families and to acquire French citizenship. It resulted in hundreds of thousands of Muslims (especially in the larger cities) living in subsidised public housing and suffering from very high unemployment rates.[76] Simultaneously France renounced the assimilation of immigrants, where they were expected to adhere to French traditional values and cultural norms. They were encouraged to retain their distinctive cultures and traditions and required merely to integrate.[77]

Since the 1995 Paris Métro and RER bombings, France has been sporadically targeted by Islamist organisations, notably the Charlie Hebdo attack in January 2015 which provoked the largest public rallies in French history, gathering 4.4 million people,[78][79] the November 2015 Paris attacks which resulted in 130 deaths, the deadliest attack on French soil since World War II,[80][81] and the deadliest in the European Union since the Madrid train bombings in 2004[82] and the 2016 Nice attack which caused 87 deaths during Bastille Day celebrations.

Geography
Main article: Geography of France
Location and borders
see description
A relief map of Metropolitan France, showing cities with over 100,000 inhabitants.
The vast majority of France's territory and population is situated in Western Europe and is called Metropolitan France, to distinguish it from the country's various overseas polities. It is bordered by the North Sea in the north, the English Channel in the northwest, the Atlantic Ocean in the west and the Mediterranean sea in the southeast. It land borders consist of Belgium and Luxembourg in the northeast, Germany and Switzerland in the east, Italy and Monaco in the southeast, and Andorra and Spain in the south and southwest. With the exception of the northeast, most of France's land borders are roughly delineated by natural boundaries and geographic features: to the south and southeast, the Pyrenees and the Alps and the Jura, respectively, and to the east, the Rhine river. Due to its shape, France is often referred to as l'Hexagone ("The Hexagon"). Metropolitan France includes various coastal islands, of which the largest is Corsica. Metropolitan France is situated mostly between latitudes 41° and 51° N, and longitudes 6° W and 10° E, on the western edge of Europe, and thus lies within the northern temperate zone. Its continental part covers about 1000 km from north to south and from east to west.

France has several overseas regions across the world, which are organised along different :

In South America: French Guiana.
In the Atlantic Ocean: Saint Pierre and Miquelon and, in the Antilles: Guadeloupe, Martinique, Saint Martin and Saint Barthélemy.
In the Pacific Ocean: French Polynesia, the special collectivity of New Caledonia, Wallis and Futuna and Clipperton Island.
In the Indian Ocean: Réunion island, Mayotte, Kerguelen Islands, Crozet Islands, St. Paul and Amsterdam islands, and the Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean
In the Antarctic: Adélie Land.
France has land borders with Brazil and Suriname via French Guiana and with the Kingdom of the Netherlands through the French portion of Saint Martin.

Metropolitan France covers 551,500 square kilometres (212,935 sq mi),[83] the largest among European Union members.[20] France's total land area, with its overseas departments and territories (excluding Adélie Land), is 643,801 km2 (248,573 sq mi), 0.45% of the total land area on Earth. France possesses a wide variety of landscapes, from coastal plains in the north and west to mountain ranges of the Alps in the southeast, the Massif Central in the south central and Pyrenees in the southwest.

Due to its numerous overseas departments and territories scattered across the planet, France possesses the second-largest Exclusive economic zone (EEZ) in the world, covering 11,035,000 km2 (4,260,000 mi2), just behind the EEZ of the United States (11,351,000 km2 / 4,383,000 mi2), but ahead of the EEZ of Australia (8,148,250 km2 / 4,111,312 mi2). Its EEZ covers approximately 8% of the total surface of all the EEZs of the world.

At 4,810.45 metres (15,782 ft)[84] above sea level, the highest point in Western Europe, Mont Blanc, is situated in the Alps on the French and Italian border. France also has extensive river systems such as the Seine, the Loire, the Garonne, and the Rhône, which divides the Massif Central from the Alps and flows into the Mediterranean Sea at the Camargue. Corsica lies off the Mediterranean coast.

Climate
Most of the low-lying areas of metropolitan France are located in the oceanic climate zone, Cfb, Cwb and Cfc in the Köppen classification. Corsica and a small part of the territory bordering the mediterranean basin lies in the Csa and Csb zones. As the French metropolitan territory is relatively large, the climate is not uniform, giving rise to the following climate nuances:

The west of France has strictly oceanic climate – it extends from Flanders to the Basque Country in a coastal strip several tens of kilometres wide, narrower to the north and south but wider in Brittany, which is almost entirely in this climate zone.
The climate of the Southwest is also oceanic but warmer.
The climate of the Northwest is oceanic but cooler and windier.
Away from the coast, the climate is oceanic throughout but its characteristics change somewhat. The Paris sedimentary basin and, more so, the basins protected by mountain chains show a stronger seasonal temperature variability and less rainfall during autumn and winter. Therefore, most of the territory has a semi-oceanic climate and forms a transition zone between strictly oceanic climate near the coasts and the Semi-continental climate of the north and centre-east (Alsace, plains of the Saône, the middle part of the Rhône, Dauphiné, Auvergne and Savoy).
The Mediterranean and the lower Rhône valley experience a Mediterranean climate due to the effect of mountain chains isolating them from the rest of the country and the resulting Mistral and Tramontane winds.
The mountain (or alpine) climate is confined to the Alps, the Pyrenees and the summits of the Massif Central, the Jura and the Vosges.
In the overseas regions, there are three broad types of climate:
A tropical climate in most overseas regions: high constant temperature throughout the year with a dry and a wet season.
An equatorial climate in French Guiana: high constant temperature with even precipitation throughout the year.
A subpolar climate in Saint Pierre and Miquelon and in most of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands: short mild summers and long very cold winters.

Oceanic climate in Normandy

 

Semi-continental climate, region of Châtenois in Alsace

 

Vineyards in Côte de Nuits, Burgundy

 

Mediterranean vegetation (lavender) in Provence

 

Alpine climate (winter) in the French Alps

 

Equatorial climate, Amazonian equatorial forest in French Guiana

 

Mediterranean climate in Corsica

 

Tundra climate in the Kerguelen islands (French Southern and Antarctic Lands)

 

Tropical climate in Bora Bora (French Polynesia)

Environment
See also: Ministry of Ecology, Sustainable Development and Energy; National parks of France; and Regional natural parks of France
color map showing Regional natural parks of France
Marine (blue), Regional (green) and National (red) natural parks in France
panorama of Mont Blanc mountain range above gray clouds under a blue sky
Mont Blanc is the highest summit in Western Europe.
France was one of the first countries to create an environment ministry, in 1971.[85] Although it is one of the most industrialised countries in the world, France is ranked only 17th by carbon dioxide emissions, behind less populous nations such as Canada or Australia. This is because France decided to invest in nuclear power following the 1973 oil crisis,[86] which now accounts for 75% of its electricity production[87] and results in less pollution.[88][89]

Like all European Union members, France agreed to cut carbon emissions by at least 20% of 1990 levels by the year 2020,[90] compared to the U.S. plan to reduce emissions by 4% of 1990 levels.[91] As of 2009, French carbon dioxide emissions per capita were lower than that of China's.[92] The country was set to impose a carbon tax in 2009 at 17 euros per tonne of carbon emitted,[93] which would have raised 4 billion euros of revenue annually.[94] However, the plan was abandoned due to fears of burdening French businesses.[95]

Forests account for 28% of France's land area,[96][97] and are some of the most diverse in Europe, comprising more than 140 species of trees.[98] There are nine national parks[99] and 46 natural parks in France,[100] with the government planning to convert 20% of its Exclusive Economic Zone into a Marine Protected Area by 2020.[101] A regional nature park[102] (French: parc naturel régional or PNR) is a public establishment in France between local authorities and the French national government covering an inhabited rural area of outstanding beauty, in order to protect the scenery and heritage as well as setting up sustainable economic development in the area.[103] A PNR sets goals and guidelines for managed human habitation, sustainable economic development, and protection of the natural environment based on each park's unique landscape and heritage. The parks foster ecological research programmes and public education in the natural sciences.[104] As of 2014 there are 49 PNRs in France.[citation needed]

According to the 2016 Environmental Performance Index conducted by Yale and Columbia, France was the tenth-most environmentally-conscious country in the world.[105]

Geology, topography and hydrography

The topography provides a major source of water and hydropower thanks to the numerous dams throughout the mountain ranges (Mont-Cenis lake.)
Metropolitan France has a wide variety of topographical sets and natural landscapes. Large parts of the current territory of France were raised during several tectonic episodes like the Hercynian uplift in the Paleozoic Era, during which the Armorican Massif, the Massif Central, the Morvan massif, the Vosges and Ardennes ranges and the island of Corsica were formed. These massifs delineate several sedimentary basins such as the Aquitaine basin in the southwest and the Paris basin in the north, the latter including several areas of particularly fertile ground such as the silt beds of Beauce and Brie. Various routes of natural passage, such as the Rhône valley, allow easy communications. The Alpine, Pyrenean and Jura mountains are much younger and have less eroded forms. The highest peak of the Alps is Mont-Blanc at 4809 metres above sea level. Although 60% of municipalities are classified as having seismic risks, these risks remain moderate. The coastlines offer contrasting landscapes: mountain ranges along the French Riviera, coastal cliffs such as the Côte d'Albâtre, and wide sandy plains in the Languedoc. The river system of France comprises the four major rivers Loire, Seine, Garonne and Rhône and their tributaries, whose combined catchment includes over 62% of the metropolitan territory. Other water courses drain towards the Meuse and Rhine along the north-eastern borders. France has 11 million square kilometres of marine waters within three oceans under its jurisdiction, of which 97% are overseas.

Administrative divisions
Main article: Administrative divisions of France
The French republic is divided into 18 regions (located in Europe and overseas), five overseas collectivities, one overseas territory, one special collectivity – New Caledonia and one uninhabited island directly under the authority of the Minister of Overseas France – Clipperton.

Regions
Hauts-de-
FranceNormandyÎle-de-
FranceGrand EstBourgogne-
Franche-
ComtéCentre-
Val de LoirePays de
la LoireBrittanyNouvelle-
AquitaineAuvergne-
Rhône-AlpesOccitanieProvence-
Alpes-
Côte d'AzurCorsicaFrench GuianaGuadeloupeMartiniqueMayotteRéunionBelgiumLuxembourgGermanySwitzerlandItalyUnited KingdomAndorraBrazilSurinameSpainChannelBay of
BiscayLigurian
SeaMediterranean
Sea
Since 2016 France is mainly divided into 18 administrative regions: 13 regions in metropolitan France (including the territorial collectivity of Corsica),[106] and five located overseas.[83] The regions are further subdivided into 101 departments,[107] which are numbered mainly alphabetically. This number is used in postal codes and was formerly used on vehicle number plates. Among the 101 departments of France, five (French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Mayotte, and Réunion) are in overseas regions (ROMs) that are also simultaneously overseas departments (DOMs), enjoy exactly the same status as metropolitan departments and are an integral part of the European Union.

The 101 departments are subdivided into 335 arrondissements, which are, in turn, subdivided into 2,054 cantons.[108] These cantons are then divided into 36,658 communes, which are municipalities with an elected municipal council.[108] Three communes—Paris, Lyon and Marseille—are subdivided into 45 municipal arrondissements.

The regions, departments and communes are all known as territorial collectivities, meaning they possess local assemblies as well as an executive. Arrondissements and cantons are merely administrative divisions. However, this was not always the case. Until 1940, the arrondissements were territorial collectivities with an elected assembly, but these were suspended by the Vichy regime and definitely abolished by the Fourth Republic in 1946.

Overseas territories and collectivities
In addition to the 18 regions and 101 departments, the French Republic has five overseas collectivities (French Polynesia, Saint Barthélemy, Saint Martin, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, and Wallis and Futuna), one sui generis collectivity (New Caledonia), one overseas territory (French Southern and Antarctic Lands), and one island possession in the Pacific Ocean (Clipperton Island).

Overseas collectivities and territories form part of the French Republic, but do not form part of the European Union or its fiscal area (with the exception of St. Bartelemy, which seceded from Guadeloupe in 2007). The Pacific Collectivities (COMs) of French Polynesia, Wallis and Futuna, and New Caledonia continue to use the CFP franc[109] whose value is strictly linked to that of the euro. In contrast, the five overseas regions used the French franc and now use the euro.[110]

diagram of the overseas territories of France showing map shapes
The lands making up the French Republic, shown at the same geographic scale.
Name	Constitutional status	Capital
 Clipperton Island	State private property under the direct authority of the French government	Uninhabited
 French Polynesia	Designated as an overseas land (pays d'outre-mer or POM), the status is the same as an overseas collectivity.	Papeete
 French Southern and Antarctic Lands	Overseas territory (territoire d'outre-mer or TOM)	Port-aux-Français
 New Caledonia	Sui generis collectivity	Nouméa
 Saint Barthélemy	Overseas collectivity (collectivité d'outre-mer or COM)	Gustavia
 Saint Martin	Overseas collectivity (collectivité d'outre-mer or COM)	Marigot
 Saint Pierre and Miquelon	Overseas collectivity (collectivité d'outre-mer or COM). Still referred to as a collectivité territoriale.	Saint-Pierre
 Wallis and Futuna	Overseas collectivity (collectivité d'outre-mer or COM). Still referred to as a territoire.	Mata-Utu
Politics
Main article: Politics of France
Government
Emmanuel Macron (cropped).jpg	Édouard Philippe (cropped).jpg
Emmanuel Macron
President	Édouard Philippe
Prime Minister
The French Republic is a unitary semi-presidential representative democratic republic with strong democratic traditions.[111] The constitution of the Fifth Republic was approved by referendum on 28 September 1958.[112] It greatly strengthened the authority of the executive in relation to parliament. The executive branch itself has two leaders: the President of the Republic, currently Emmanuel Macron, who is head of state and is elected directly by universal adult suffrage for a 5-year term (formerly 7 years),[113] and the Government, led by the president-appointed Prime Minister.

The French parliament is a bicameral legislature comprising a National Assembly (Assemblée Nationale) and a Senate.[114] The National Assembly deputies represent local constituencies and are directly elected for 5-year terms.[115] The Assembly has the power to dismiss the government, and thus the majority in the Assembly determines the choice of government. Senators are chosen by an electoral college for 6-year terms (originally 9-year terms), and one half of the seats are submitted to election every 3 years starting in September 2008.[116]

The Senate's legislative powers are limited; in the event of disagreement between the two chambers, the National Assembly has the final say.[117] The Government has a strong influence in shaping the agenda of Parliament.

Until World War II, Radicals were a strong political force in France, embodied by the Republican, Radical and Radical-Socialist Party which was the most important party of the Third Republic. Since World War II, they were marginalized while French politics became characterised by two politically opposed groupings: one left-wing, centred on the French Section of the Workers' International and its successor the Socialist Party (since 1969); and the other right-wing, centred on the Gaullist Party, whose name changed over time: the Rally of the French People (1947), the Union of Democrats for the Republic (1958), the Rally for the Republic (1976), the Union for a Popular Movement (2007) and The Republicans (since 2015). In the 2017 presidential and legislative elections, radical centrist party En Marche! became the dominant force, overtaking both Socialists and Republicans.

Law
Main article: Law of France
France uses a civil legal system;[83] that is, law arises primarily from written statutes; judges are not to make law, but merely to interpret it (though the amount of judicial interpretation in certain areas makes it equivalent to case law). Basic principles of the rule of law were laid in the Napoleonic Code (which was, in turn, largely based on the royal law codified under Louis XIV). In agreement with the principles of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, law should only prohibit actions detrimental to society. As Guy Canivet, first president of the Court of Cassation, wrote about the management of prisons: Freedom is the rule, and its restriction is the exception; any restriction of Freedom must be provided for by Law and must follow the principles of necessity and proportionality. That is, Law should lay out prohibitions only if they are needed, and if the inconveniences caused by this restriction do not exceed the inconveniences that the prohibition is supposed to remedy.

color drawing of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen from 1789
The basic principles that the French Republic must respect are found in the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen.
French law is divided into two principal areas: private law and public law. Private law includes, in particular, civil law and criminal law. Public law includes, in particular, administrative law and constitutional law. However, in practical terms, French law comprises three principal areas of law: civil law, criminal law, and administrative law. Criminal laws can only address the future and not the past (criminal ex post facto laws are prohibited).[118] While administrative law is often a subcategory of civil law in many countries, it is completely separated in France and each body of law is headed by a specific supreme court: ordinary courts (which handle criminal and civil litigation) are headed by the Court of Cassation and administrative courts are headed by the Council of State.

To be applicable, every law must be officially published in the Journal officiel de la République française.

France does not recognise religious law as a motivation for the enactment of prohibitions. France has long had neither blasphemy laws nor sodomy laws (the latter being abolished in 1791). However, "offences against public decency" (contraires aux bonnes mœurs) or disturbing public order (trouble à l'ordre public) have been used to repress public expressions of homosexuality or street prostitution. Since 1999, civil unions for homosexual couples are permitted, and since May 2013, same-sex marriage and LGBT adoption are legal in France.[119] Laws prohibiting discriminatory speech in the press are as old as 1881. Some consider however that hate speech laws in France are too broad or severe and damage freedom of speech.[120] France has laws against racism and antisemitism.[121] Since 1990, the Gayssot Act prohibits Holocaust denial.

Freedom of religion is constitutionally guaranteed by the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen. The 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State is the basis for laïcité (state secularism): the state does not formally recognize any religion, except in Alsace-Moselle. Nonetheless, it does recognize religious associations. The Parliament has listed many religious movements as dangerous cults since 1995, and has banned wearing conspicuous religious symbols in schools since 2004. In 2010, it banned the wearing of face-covering Islamic veils in public; human rights groups such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch described the law as discriminatory towards Muslims.[122][123] However, it is supported by most of the population.[124]

Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of France
François Mitterrand Chancellor Helmut Kohl, 24 September 1987 at press conference with microphones
French President François Mitterrand and West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, in 1987.
France is a founding member of the United Nations and serves as one of the permanent members of the UN Security Council with veto rights.[125] In 2015, France was described as being "the best networked state in the world", because it is a country that "is member of more multi-lateral organisations than any other country".[126]

France is a member of the G8, World Trade Organization (WTO),[127] the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC)[128] and the Indian Ocean Commission (COI).[129] It is an associate member of the Association of Caribbean States (ACS)[130] and a leading member of the International Francophone Organisation (OIF) of 84 fully or partly French-speaking countries.[131]

As a significant hub for international relations, France hosts the second largest assembly of diplomatic missions in the world and the headquarters of international organisations including the OECD, UNESCO, Interpol, the International Bureau of Weights and Measures, and la Francophonie.[132]

Postwar French foreign policy has been largely shaped by membership of the European Union, of which it was a founding member. Since the 1960s, France has developed close ties with reunified Germany to become the most influential driving force of the EU.[133] In the 1960s, France sought to exclude the British from the European unification process,[134] seeking to build its own standing in continental Europe. However, since 1904, France has maintained an "Entente cordiale" with the United Kingdom, and there has been a strengthening of links between the countries, especially militarily.

European Parliament opening in Strasbourg with crowd and many countries' flags on flagpoles
The European Parliament in Strasbourg, near the border with Germany. France is a founding member of all EU institutions.
France is a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), but under President de Gaulle, it excluded itself from the joint military command to protest the special relationship between the United States and Britain and to preserve the independence of French foreign and security policies. However, as a result of Nicolas Sarkozy's pro-American politics (much criticised in France by the leftists and by a part of the right), France rejoined the NATO joint military command on 4 April 2009.[135][136][137]

In the early 1990s, the country drew considerable criticism from other nations for its underground nuclear tests in French Polynesia.[138]

France vigorously opposed the 2003 invasion of Iraq,[139][140] straining bilateral relations with the US[141][142] and the UK.[citation needed]

France retains strong political and economic influence in its former African colonies (Françafrique)[143] and has supplied economic aid and troops for peace-keeping missions in Ivory Coast and Chad.[144] Recently, after the unilateral declaration of independence of northern Mali by the Tuareg MNLA and the subsequent regional Northern Mali conflict with several Islamist groups including Ansar Dine and MOJWA, France and other African states intervened to help the Malian Army to retake control.

In 2013, France was the fourth largest (in absolute terms) donor of development aid in the world, behind the US, the UK and Germany. This represents 0.36% of its GDP, in this regard rating France as twelfth largest donor on the list.[145] The organisation managing the French help is the French Development Agency, which finances primarily humanitarian projects in sub-Saharan Africa.[146] The main goals of this support are "developing infrastructure, access to health care and education, the implementation of appropriate economic policies and the consolidation of the rule of law and democracy".[146]

Military
Main article: French Armed Forces
see description
Examples of France's military. Clockwise from top left: Nuclear aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle; A Rafale fighter aircraft; French Chasseurs Alpins patrolling the valleys of Kapisa province in Afghanistan; a Leclerc tank in Paris for the 14 July Bastille Day Military Parade.
The French Armed Forces (Forces armées françaises) are the military and paramilitary forces of France, under the president as supreme commander. They consist of the French Army (Armée de Terre), French Navy (Marine Nationale, formerly called Armée de Mer), the French Air Force (Armée de l'Air), the French Strategic Nuclear Force (Force Nucléaire Stratégique, nicknamed Force de Frappe or "Strike Force") and the Military Police called National Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie nationale), which also fulfils civil police duties in the rural areas of France. Together they are among the largest armed forces in the world and the largest in the EU.

While the Gendarmerie is an integral part of the French armed forces (gendarmes are career soldiers), and therefore under the purview of the Ministry of Defence, it is operationally attached to the Ministry of the Interior as far as its civil police duties are concerned.

When acting as general purpose police force, the Gendarmerie encompasses the counter terrorist units of the Parachute Intervention Squadron of the National Gendarmerie (Escadron Parachutiste d'Intervention de la Gendarmerie Nationale), the National Gendarmerie Intervention Group (Groupe d'Intervention de la Gendarmerie Nationale), the Search Sections of the National Gendarmerie (Sections de Recherche de la Gendarmerie Nationale), responsible for criminal enquiries, and the Mobile Brigades of the National Gendarmerie (Brigades mobiles de la Gendarmerie Nationale, or in short Gendarmerie mobile) which have the task to maintain public order.

The following special units are also part of the Gendarmerie: The Republican Guard (Garde républicaine) which protects public buildings hosting major French institutions, the Maritime Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie maritime) serving as Coast Guard, the Provost Service (Prévôté), acting as the Military Police branch of the Gendarmerie.

As far as the French intelligence units are concerned, the Directorate-General for External Security (Direction générale de la sécurité extérieure) is considered to be a component of the Armed Forces under the authority of the Ministry of Defence. The other, the Central Directorate for Interior Intelligence (Direction centrale du renseignement intérieur) is a division of the National Police Force (Direction générale de la Police Nationale), and therefore reports directly to the Ministry of the Interior. There has been no national conscription since 1997.[147]

France has a special military corps, the French Foreign Legion, founded in 1830, which consists of foreign nationals from over 140 countries who are willing to serve in the French Armed Forces and become French citizens after the end of their service period. The only other countries having similar units are Spain (the Spanish Foreign Legion, called Tercio, was founded in 1920) and Luxembourg (foreigners can serve in the National Army provided they speak Luxembourgish).

France is a permanent member of the Security Council of the UN, and a recognised nuclear state since 1960. France has signed and ratified the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)[148] and acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. France's annual military expenditure in 2011 was US$62.5 billion, or 2.3%, of its GDP making it the fifth biggest military spender in the world after the United States, China, Russia, and the United Kingdom.[149]

French nuclear deterrence, (formerly known as "Force de Frappe"), relies on complete independence. The current French nuclear force consists of four Triomphant class submarines equipped with submarine-launched ballistic missiles. In addition to the submarine fleet, it is estimated that France has about 60 ASMP medium-range air-to-ground missiles with nuclear warheads,[150] of which around 50 are deployed by the Air Force using the Mirage 2000N long-range nuclear strike aircraft, while around 10 are deployed by the French Navy's Super Étendard Modernisé (SEM) attack aircraft, which operate from the nuclear-powered aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle. The new Rafale F3 aircraft will gradually replace all Mirage 2000N and SEM in the nuclear strike role with the improved ASMP-A missile with a nuclear warhead.

France has major military industries with one of the largest aerospace industries in the world.[151][152] Its industries have produced such equipment as the Rafale fighter, the Charles de Gaulle aircraft carrier, the Exocet missile and the Leclerc tank among others. Despite withdrawing from the Eurofighter project, France is actively investing in European joint projects such as the Eurocopter Tiger, multipurpose frigates, the UCAV demonstrator nEUROn and the Airbus A400M. France is a major arms seller,[153][154] with most of its arsenal's designs available for the export market with the notable exception of nuclear-powered devices.

The military parade held in Paris each 14 July for France's national day, called Bastille Day in English-speaking countries (but not in France), is the oldest and largest regular military parade in Europe.

Government finance
See also: Taxation in France
The French government has run a budget deficit each year since the early 1970s. As of 2016, French government debt levels reached 2.2 trillion euros, the equivalent of 96.4% of French GDP.[155]

In late 2012, credit rating agencies warned that growing French government debt levels risked France's AAA credit rating, raising the possibility of a future downgrade and subsequent higher borrowing costs for the French government.[156]

Economy
Main article: Economy of France
European map of Eurozone monetary union
France is part of a monetary union, the Eurozone (dark blue), and of the European Single Market.
A member of the Group of 7 (formerly G8) leading industrialised countries, as of 2014, it is ranked as the world's ninth largest and the EU's second largest economy by purchasing power parity.[15] With 31 of the 500 biggest companies in the world in 2015, France ranks fourth in the Fortune Global 500, ahead of Germany and the UK.[157] France joined 11 other EU members to launch the euro in 1999, with euro coins and banknotes completely replacing the French franc (?) in 2002.[158]

France has a mixed economy that combines extensive private enterprise[159][160] with substantial state enterprise and government intervention. The government retains considerable influence over key segments of infrastructure sectors, with majority ownership of railway, electricity, aircraft, nuclear power and telecommunications.[83][not in citation given] It has been relaxing its control over these sectors since the early 1990s.[83][not in citation given] The government is slowly corporatising the state sector and selling off holdings in France Télécom, Air France, as well as in the insurance, banking, and defence industries.[83][not in citation given] France has an important aerospace industry led by the European consortium Airbus, and has its own national spaceport, the Centre Spatial Guyanais.


Composition of the French economy (GDP) in 2016 by expenditure type
As of 2009, the World Trade Organization (WTO) reported France was the world's sixth largest exporter and the fourth largest importer of manufactured goods.[161] As of 2016, the World Factbook ranked France seventh largest exporter.[162] In 2008, France was the third largest recipient of foreign direct investment among OECD countries at $118 billion, ranking behind Luxembourg (where foreign direct investment was essentially monetary transfers to banks located there) and the US ($316 billion), but above the UK ($96.9 billion), Germany ($25 billion), or Japan ($24 billion). In the same year, French companies invested $220 billion outside France, ranking France as the second largest outward direct investor in the OECD, behind the US ($311 billion), and ahead of the UK ($111 billion), Japan ($128 billion) and Germany ($157 billion).[163][164]

Financial services, banking and the insurance sector are an important part of the economy. The Paris stock exchange (French: La Bourse de Paris) is an old institution, created by Louis XV in 1724.[165] In 2000, the stock exchanges of Paris, Amsterdam and Bruxelles merged into Euronext.[166] In 2007, Euronext merged with the New York stock exchange to form NYSE Euronext, the world's largest stock exchange.[166] Euronext Paris, the French branch of the NYSE Euronext group is Europe's 2nd largest stock exchange market, behind the London Stock Exchange.

France is a member of the Eurozone (around 330 million consumers) which is part of the European Single Market (more than 500 million consumers). Several domestic commercial policies are determined by agreements among European Union (EU) members and by EU legislation. France introduced the common European currency, the Euro in 2002.[167][168]

French companies have maintained key positions in the insurance and banking industries: AXA is the world's largest insurance company. The leading French banks are BNP Paribas and the Crédit Agricole, ranking as the world's first and sixth largest banks in 2010[169] (by assets), while the Société Générale group was ranked the world's eighth largest in 2009.

Agriculture
Champagne wine in a flute
Champagne, widely regarded as a luxury good, originates from the Champagne region in northeast France.
France has historically been a large producer of agricultural products.[170] Extensive tracts of fertile land, the application of modern technology, and EU subsidies have combined to make France the leading agricultural producer and exporter in Europe[171] (representing 20% of the EU's agricultural production[172]) and the world's third biggest exporter of agricultural products.[173]

Wheat, poultry, dairy, beef, and pork, as well as internationally recognised processed foods are the primary French agricultural exports. Rosé wines are primarily consumed within the country, but Champagne and Bordeaux wines are major exports, being known worldwide. EU agriculture subsidies to France have decreased in recent years but still amounted to $8 billion in 2007.[174] That same year, France sold 33.4 billion euros of transformed agricultural products.[175]

France produces rum via sugar cane-based distilleries almost all of which are located in overseas territories such as Martinique, Guadeloupe, and La Réunion.

Agriculture is an important sector of France's economy: 3.8% of the active population is employed in agriculture, whereas the total agri-food industry made up 4.2% of French GDP in 2005.[172]

Tourism
Main article: Tourism in France
Tour Eiffel at sunrise from the trocadero
The Eiffel Tower is the world's most visited paid monument,[176] an icon of both Paris and France.
With 83 million foreign tourists in 2012,[13] France is ranked as the first tourist destination in the world, ahead of the US (67 million) and China (58 million). This 83 million figure excludes people staying less than 24 hours, such as North Europeans crossing France on their way to Spain or Italy. It is third in income from tourism due to shorter duration of visits.[177] The most popular tourist sites (according to a 2003 ranking[178] visitors per year) include: Eiffel Tower (6.2 million), Louvre Museum (5.7 million), Palace of Versailles (2.8 million), Musée d'Orsay (2.1 million), Arc de Triomphe (1.2 million), Centre Pompidou (1.2 million), Mont Saint-Michel (1 million), Château de Chambord (711,000), Sainte-Chapelle (683,000), Château du Haut-Kœnigsbourg (549,000), Puy de Dôme (500,000), Musée Picasso (441,000), Carcassonne (362,000).

Mont Saint-Michel a hill monastery in a wetland, with the tide out
The Mont Saint-Michel is one of France's most visited and recognisable landmarks. It is one of the 39 UNESCO World Heritage Sites in France.
France has 37 sites inscribed in UNESCO's World Heritage List and features cities of high cultural interest, beaches and seaside resorts, ski resorts, and rural regions that many enjoy for their beauty and tranquillity (green tourism). Small and picturesque French villages are promoted through the association Les Plus Beaux Villages de France (litt. "The Most Beautiful Villages of France"). The "Remarkable Gardens" label is a list of the over 200 gardens classified by the French Ministry of Culture. This label is intended to protect and promote remarkable gardens and parks. France attracts many religious pilgrims on their way to St. James, or to Lourdes, a town in the Hautes-Pyrénées that hosts several million visitors a year. Another major destination are the Châteaux of the Loire Valley, this World Heritage Site is noteworthy for its architectural heritage, in its historic towns but in particular its castles (châteaux), such as the Châteaux d'Amboise, de Chambord, d'Ussé, de Villandry and Chenonceau.

France, especially Paris, has some of the world's largest and renowned museums, including the Louvre, which is the most visited art museum in the world, the Musée d'Orsay, mostly devoted to impressionism, and Beaubourg, dedicated to Contemporary art. Disneyland Paris is Europe's most popular theme park, with 15 million combined visitors to the resort's Disneyland Park and Walt Disney Studios Park in 2009.[179]

With more than 10 millions tourists a year, the French Riviera (or Côte d'Azur), in south-east France, is the second leading tourist destination in the country, after the Paris region.[180] It benefits from 300 days of sunshine per year, 115 kilometres (71 mi) of coastline and beaches, 18 golf courses, 14 ski resorts and 3,000 restaurants.[181]:31 Each year the Côte d'Azur hosts 50% of the world's superyacht fleet.[181]:66

Energy
Further information: Energy in France
Nuclear power plant in Cattenom, France four large cooling towers expelling white water vapor against a blue sky
France derives most of its electricity from nuclear power, the highest percentage in the world. Photo of Cattenom Nuclear Power Plant.
Électricité de France (EDF), the main electricity generation and distribution company in France, is also one of the world's largest producers of electricity. In 2003, it produced 22% of the European Union's electricity,[citation needed] primarily from nuclear power. France is the smallest emitter of carbon dioxide among the G8, due to its heavy investment in nuclear power.[182] As of 2016, 72% of the electricity produced by France is generated by 58 nuclear power plants.[183][184] In this context, renewable energies are having difficulty taking off. France also uses hydroelectric dams to produce electricity, such as the Eguzon dam, Étang de Soulcem, and Lac de Vouglans.

Transport
Main article: Transport in France

A TGV Duplex crossing the Cize–Bolozon viaduct. The train can reach a maximum speed of 320 km/h (198.84 mph).
The railway network of France, which as of 2008 stretches 29,473 kilometres (18,314 mi)[185] is the second most extensive in Western Europe after that of Germany.[186] It is operated by the SNCF, and high-speed trains include the Thalys, the Eurostar and TGV, which travels at 320 km/h (199 mph) in commercial use.[187] The Eurostar, along with the Eurotunnel Shuttle, connects with the United Kingdom through the Channel Tunnel. Rail connections exist to all other neighbouring countries in Europe, except Andorra. Intra-urban connections are also well developed with both underground services (Paris, Lyon, Lille, Marseille, Toulouse, Rennes) and tramway services (Nantes, Strasbourg, Bordeaux, Grenoble, Montpellier...) complementing bus services.

There are approximately 1,027,183 kilometres (638,262 mi) of serviceable roadway in France, ranking it the most extensive network of the European continent.[188] The Paris region is enveloped with the most dense network of roads and highways that connect it with virtually all parts of the country. French roads also handle substantial international traffic, connecting with cities in neighbouring Belgium, Luxembourg, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Spain, Andorra and Monaco. There is no annual registration fee or road tax; however, usage of the mostly privately owned motorways is through tolls except in the vicinity of large communes. The new car market is dominated by domestic brands such as Renault (27% of cars sold in France in 2003), Peugeot (20.1%) and Citroën (13.5%).[189] Over 70% of new cars sold in 2004 had diesel engines, far more than contained petrol or LPG engines.[190] France possesses the Millau Viaduct, the world's tallest bridge,[191] and has built many important bridges such as the Pont de Normandie.


Air France is one of the biggest airlines in the world.
There are 464 airports in France.[83] Charles de Gaulle Airport, located in the vicinity of Paris, is the largest and busiest airport in the country, handling the vast majority of popular and commercial traffic and connecting Paris with virtually all major cities across the world. Air France is the national carrier airline, although numerous private airline companies provide domestic and international travel services. There are ten major ports in France, the largest of which is in Marseille,[192] which also is the largest bordering the Mediterranean Sea.[193][194] 12,261 kilometres (7,619 mi) of waterways traverse France including the Canal du Midi, which connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Atlantic Ocean through the Garonne river.[83]

Science and technology
Main article: List of French inventions and discoveries
Ariane four rocket taking off past the tower
France is one of the biggest contributors to the European Space Agency (Ariane 4 launch pictured).
Since the Middle Ages, France has been a major contributor to scientific and technological achievement. Around the beginning of the 11th century, Pope Sylvester II, born Gerbert d'Aurillac, reintroduced the abacus and armillary sphere, and introduced Arabic numerals and clocks to northern and western Europe.[195] The University of Paris, founded in the mid-12th century, is still one of the most important universities in the Western world.[196] In the 17th century, mathematician René Descartes defined a method for the acquisition of scientific knowledge, while Blaise Pascal became famous for his work on probability and fluid mechanics. They were both key figures of the Scientific revolution, which blossomed in Europe during this period. The Academy of Sciences was founded by Louis XIV to encourage and protect the spirit of French scientific research. It was at the forefront of scientific developments in Europe in the 17th and 18th centuries. It is one of the earliest academies of sciences.

The Age of Enlightenment was marked by the work of biologist Buffon and chemist Lavoisier, who discovered the role of oxygen in combustion, while Diderot and D'Alembert published the Encyclopédie, which aimed to give access to "useful knowledge" to the people, a knowledge that they can apply to their everyday life.[197] With the Industrial Revolution, the 19th century saw spectacular scientific developments in France with scientists such as Augustin Fresnel, founder of modern optics, Sadi Carnot who laid the foundations of thermodynamics, and Louis Pasteur, a pioneer of microbiology. Other eminent French scientists of the 19th century have their names inscribed on the Eiffel Tower.

Famous French scientists of the 20th century include the mathematician and physicist Henri Poincaré, physicists Henri Becquerel, Pierre and Marie Curie, remained famous for their work on radioactivity, the physicist Paul Langevin and virologist Luc Montagnier, co-discoverer of HIV AIDS. Hand transplantation was developed on 23 September 1998 in Lyon by a team assembled from different countries around the world including Jean-Michel Dubernard who, shortly thereafter, performed the first successful double hand transplant.[198] Telesurgery was developed by Jacques Marescaux and his team on 7 September 2001 across the Atlantic Ocean (New-York-Strasbourg, Lindbergh Operation).[199] A face transplant was first done on 27 November 2005[200][201] by Dr Bernard Devauchelle.

Top view of the ring of European Synchrotron Radiation Facility
European Synchrotron Radiation Facility in Grenoble.
France was the fourth country to achieve nuclear capability[202] and has the third largest nuclear weapons arsenal in the world.[203] It is also a leader in civilian nuclear technology.[204][205][206] France was the third nation, after the former USSR and the United States, to launch its own space satellite and remains the biggest contributor to the European Space Agency (ESA).[207][208][209] The European Airbus, formed from the French group Aérospatiale along with DaimlerChrysler Aerospace AG (DASA) and Construcciones Aeronáuticas SA (CASA), designs and develops civil and military aircraft as well as communications systems, missiles, space rockets, helicopters, satellites, and related systems. France also hosts major international research instruments such as the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility or the Institut Laue–Langevin and remains a major member of CERN. It also owns Minatec, Europe's leading nanotechnology research center.

SNCF, the French national railroad company, has developed the TGV, a high speed train which holds a series of world speed records. The TGV has been the fastest wheeled train in commercial use since reaching a speed of 574.8 km/h (357.2 mph) on 3 April 2007.[210] Western Europe is now serviced by a network of TGV lines.

As of 2016, 68 French people have been awarded a Nobel Prize[211] and 12 have received the Fields Medal.[212]

Demographics
Main articles: Demographics of France and French people
map of population in France
Population density in the French Republic at the 1999 census.
With an estimated total population of 67.15 million people as of October 2017,[213] with 65 million in metropolitan France, France is the 20th most populous country in the world and the third-most populous in Europe. France is also second most populous country in the European Union after Germany.

France is an outlier among developed countries in general, and European countries in particular, in having a fairly high rate of natural population growth: by birth rates alone, France was responsible for almost all natural population growth in the European Union in 2006, with the natural growth rate (excess of births over deaths) rising to 300,000 and with the immigration the population grew with almost 400,000 people,[214] although in the late 2010s it fell to 200,000. This was the highest rate since the end of the baby boom in 1973, and coincides with the rise of the total fertility rate from a nadir of 1.7 in 1994 to 2.0 in 2010. As of January 2017 the fertility rate was 1.93.[215][216][217]

From 2006 to 2011 population growth was on average +0.6% per year.[218] Immigrants are also major contributors to this trend; in 2010, 27% of newborns in metropolitan France had at least one foreign-born parent and 24% had at least one parent born outside of Europe (parents born in overseas territories are considered as born in France).[219]

Ethnic groups
Most French people are of Celtic (Gauls) origin, with an admixture of Latin (Romans) and Germanic (Franks) groups.[220] Different regions reflect this diverse heritage, with notable Breton elements in western France, Aquitanian in the southwest, Scandinavian in the northwest, Alemannic in the northeast and Ligurian influence in the southeast.

Large-scale immigration over the last century and a half has led to a more multicultural society. In 2004, the Institut Montaigne estimated that within Metropolitan France, 51 million people were White (85% of the population), 6 million were North African (10%), 2 million were Black (3.3%), and 1 million were Asian (1.7%).[221][222]

A law originating from the 1789 revolution and reaffirmed in the 1958 French Constitution makes it illegal for the French state to collect data on ethnicity and ancestry. In 2008, the TeO ("Trajectories and origins") poll conducted jointly by INED and the French National Institute of Statistics[223][224] estimated that 5 million people were of Italian ancestry (the largest immigrant community), followed by 3 million[225][226] to 6 million[227] people of North African ancestry, 2.5 million people of Sub-Saharan African origin, and 200,000 people of Turkish ancestry.[228] There are over 500,000 ethnic Armenians in France. There are also sizeable minorities of other European ethnic groups, namely Spanish, Portuguese, Polish, and Greek.[225][229][230]

France has a significant Gypsy (Gitan) population, numbering between 20,000 and 400,000.[231] Famous French Gypsies (Gitans) include Django Reinhardt, the Gipsy Kings and Kendji Girac. Gypsies inspired the French novel The Hunchback of Notre Dame. Many foreign Romani people are expelled back to Bulgaria and Romania frequently.[232]

It is currently estimated that 40% of the French population is descended at least partially from the different waves of immigration the country has received since the early 20th century;[233] between 1921 and 1935 alone, about 1.1 million net immigrants came to France.[234] The next largest wave came in the 1960s, when around 1.6 million pieds noirs returned to France following the independence of its North African possessions, Algeria and Morocco.[235][236] They were joined by numerous former colonial subjects from North and West Africa, as well as numerous immigrants from Spain and Portugal.

France remains a major destination for immigrants, accepting about 200,000 legal immigrants annually.[237] It is also Western Europe's leading recipient of asylum seekers, with an estimated 50,000 applications in 2005 (a 15% decrease from 2004).[238] The European Union allows free movement between the member states, although France established controls to curb Eastern European migration, and immigration remains a contentious political issue.

In 2008, the INSEE estimated that the total number of foreign-born immigrants was around 5 million (8% of the population), while their French-born descendants numbered 6.5 million, or 11% of the population. Thus, nearly a fifth of the country's population were either first or second-generation immigrants, of which more than 5 million were of European origin and 4 million of Maghrebi ancestry.[239][240][241] In 2008, France granted citizenship to 137,000 persons, mostly to people from Morocco, Algeria and Turkey.[242]

In 2014 The National Institute of Statistics (INSEE, for its acronym in French) published a study which reported doubling of the number of Spanish immigrants, Portuguese and Italians in France between 2009 and 2012. According to the French Institute, this increase resulting from the financial crisis that hit several European countries in that period, has pushed up the number of Europeans installed in France.[243] Statistics on Spanish immigrants in France show a growth of 107 percent between 2009 and 2012, i.e. in this period went from 5300 to 11,000 people.[243] Of the total of 229,000 foreigners who were in France in 2012, nearly 8% were Portuguese, 5% British, 5% Spanish, 4% Italians, 4% Germans, 3% Romanians, and 3% Belgians.[243]

Major cities
France is a highly urbanized country, with its largest cities (in terms of metropolitan area population in 2013[244]) being Paris (12,405,426 inh.), Lyon (2,237,676), Marseille (1,734,277), Toulouse (1,291,517), Bordeaux (1,178,335), Lille (1,175,828), Nice (1,004,826), Nantes (908,815), Strasbourg (773,447) and Rennes (700,675). (Note: There are significant differences between the metropolitan population figures just cited and those in the following table, which only include the core population). Rural flight was a perennial political issue throughout most of the 20th century.



  v t e
Largest cities or towns in France
2010 census
Rank	Name	Region	Pop.	Rank	Name	Region	Pop.	
Paris
Paris
Marseille
Marseille	1	Paris	Île-de-France	2,243,833	11	Rennes	Brittany	207,178	Lyon
Lyon
Toulouse
Toulouse
2	Marseille	Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur	850,726	12	Reims	Grand Est	179,992
3	Lyon	Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes	484,344	13	Le Havre	Normandy	175,497
4	Toulouse	Occitanie	441,802	14	Saint-Étienne	Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes	171,260
5	Nice	Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur	343,304	15	Toulon	Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur	164,532
6	Nantes	Pays de la Loire	284,970	16	Grenoble	Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes	155,637
7	Strasbourg	Grand Est	271,782	17	Dijon	Bourgogne-Franche-Comté	151,212
8	Montpellier	Occitanie	257,351	18	Angers	Pays de la Loire	147,571
9	Bordeaux	Nouvelle-Aquitaine	239,157	19	Villeurbanne	Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes	145,150
10	Lille	Hauts-de-France	227,560	20	Saint-Denis	Réunion	145,022
Functional urban areas
[245]

See also: Urban area (France) and Urban unit

Map of the 25 largest urban units by population
Functional
urban areas	REGION	Population
2012
Paris	Île-de-France	11,688,000
Lyon	Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes	1,935,000
Marseille	Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur	1,732,000
Lille	Hauts-de-France	1,357,000
Toulouse	Occitania	1,255,000
Bordeaux	Nouvelle-Aquitaine	1,152,000
Nice	Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur	846,000
Strasbourg	Grand Est	767,000
Rouen	Normandy	696,000
Rennes	Brittany	691,000
Montpellier	Occitania	658,000
Grenoble	Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes	657,000
Toulon	Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur	552,000
Saint-Étienne	Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes	525,000
Language
Main articles: French language, Languages of France, and Organisation internationale de la Francophonie
world map of French speaking countries
A map of the Francophone world
  native language
  administrative language
  secondary or non-official language
  francophone minorities
According to Article 2 of the Constitution, the official language of France is French,[246] a Romance language derived from Latin. Since 1635, the Académie française has been France's official authority on the French language, although its recommendations carry no legal. There are also regional languages spoken in France, such as Occitan, Breton, Catalan, Flemish (Dutch dialect), Alsatian (German dialect), Basque, and others. (see Languages of France)

The French government does not regulate the choice of language in publications by individuals but the use of French is required by law in commercial and workplace communications. In addition to mandating the use of French in the territory of the Republic, the French government tries to promote French in the European Union and globally through institutions such as La Francophonie. The perceived threat from anglicisation has prompted efforts to safeguard the position of the French language in France. Besides French, there exist 77 vernacular minority languages of France, eight spoken in French metropolitan territory and 69 in the French overseas territories.

From the 17th to the mid-20th century, French served as the pre-eminent international language of diplomacy and international affairs as well as a lingua franca among the educated classes of Europe.[247] The dominant position of French language in international affairs was overtaken by English, since the emergence of the US as a major power.[53][248][249]

For most of the time in which French served as an international lingua franca, it was not the native language of most Frenchmen: a report in 1794 conducted by Henri Grégoire found that of the country's 25 million people, only three million spoke French natively; the rest spoke one of the country's many regional languages, such as Alsatian, Breton or Occitan.[250] Through the expansion of public education, in which French was the sole language of instruction, as well as other factors such as increased urbanisation and the rise of mass communication, French gradually came to be adopted by virtually the entire population, a process not completed until the 20th century.

As a result of France's extensive colonial ambitions between the 17th and 20th centuries, French was introduced to the Americas, Africa, Polynesia, South-East Asia, and the Caribbean. French is the second most studied foreign language in the world after English,[251] and is a lingua franca in some regions, notably in Africa. The legacy of French as a living language outside Europe is mixed: it is nearly extinct in some former French colonies (The Levant, South and Southeast Asia), while creoles and pidgins based on French have emerged in the French departments in the West Indies and the South Pacific (French Polynesia). On the other hand, many former French colonies have adopted French as an official language, and the total number of French speakers is increasing, especially in Africa.

It is estimated that between 300 million[252] and 500 million[253] people worldwide can speak French, either as a mother tongue or a second language.

Religion
Main article: Religion in France
Religion in France (2016)[2]

  Christianity (51.1%)
  No religion (39.6%)
  Islam (5.6%)
  Judaism (0.8%)
  Other religion (2.5%)
  Undecided (0.4%)
Notre-Dame de Reims façade, gothic stone cathedral against blue sky
Notre-Dame de Reims is the Roman Catholic cathedral where the kings of France were crowned until 1825.[XV]
France is a secular country, and freedom of religion is a constitutional right. French religious policy is based on the concept of laïcité, a strict separation of church and state under which public life is kept completely secular.

According to a survey held in 2016 by Institut Montaigne and Institut français d'opinion publique (IFOP), 51.1% of the total population of France was Christian as of that year; at the same time 39.6% of the population had no religion (atheism or agnosticism), 5.6% were Muslims, 2.5% were followers of other faiths, and the remaining 0.4% were undecided about their faith.[2] Estimates of the number of Muslims in France vary widely. In 2003, the French Ministry of the Interior estimated the total number of people of Muslim background to be between 5 and 6 million (8–10%).[254][255] The current Jewish community in France (as of 2016, about 0.8% of the population are religious Jews[2]) is the largest in Europe and the third-largest in the world, after those in Israel and the United States.

Catholicism has been the predominant religion in France for more than a millennium, though it is not as actively practised today as it was. Among the 47,000 religious buildings in France, 94% are Roman Catholic.[256] During the French Revolution, activists conducted a brutal campaign of de-Christianisation, ending the Catholic Church as the state religion. In some cases clergy and churches were attacked, with iconoclasm stripping the churches of statues and ornament. After the back and forth of Catholic royal and secular republican governments during the 19th century, France established laïcité by passage of the 1905 law on the Separation of the Churches and the State.[257]

Since 1905 the French government has followed the principle of laïcité, in which it is prohibited from recognising any specific right to a religious community (except for legacy statutes like those of military chaplains and the local law in Alsace-Moselle). It recognises religious organisations according to formal legal criteria that do not address religious doctrine. Conversely, religious organisations are expected to refrain from intervening in policy-making.[258] Certain groups, such as Scientology, Children of God, the Unification Church, or the Order of the Solar Temple, are considered cults ("sectes" in French),[259] and therefore do not have the same status as recognised religions in France. Secte is considered a pejorative term in France.[260]

Health
Main article: Health in France
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital in Paris, stone building with slate dome
The Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, a teaching hospital in Paris, one of Europe's largest hospitals.[261]
The French health care system is one of universal health care largely financed by government national health insurance. In its 2000 assessment of world health care systems, the World Health Organization found that France provided the "close to best overall health care" in the world.[262] The French healthcare system was ranked first worldwide by the World Health Organization in 1997.[263][264] In 2011, France spent 11.6% of GDP on health care, or US$4,086 per capita,[265] a figure much higher than the average spent by countries in Europe but less than in the US. Approximately 77% of health expenditures are covered by government funded agencies.[266]

Care is generally free for people affected by chronic diseases (affections de longues durées) such as cancer, AIDS or cystic fibrosis. Average life expectancy at birth is 78 years for men and 85 years for women, one of the highest of the European Union.[267][268] There are 3.22 physicians for every 1000 inhabitants in France,[269] and average health care spending per capita was US$4,719 in 2008.[270] As of 2007, approximately 140,000 inhabitants (0.4%) of France are living with HIV/AIDS.[83]

Even if the French have the reputation of being one of the thinnest people in developed countries,[271][272][273][274][275][276] France—like other rich countries—faces an increasing and recent epidemic of obesity, due mostly to the replacement in French eating habits of traditional healthy French cuisine by junk food.[271][272][277] The French obesity rate is still far below that of the USA (for instance, obesity rate in France is the same as the US had in the 1970s[272]), and is still the lowest of Europe.[274][277] Authorities now regard obesity as one of the main public health issues[278] and fight it fiercely. Rates of childhood obesity are slowing in France, while continuing to grow in other countries.[279]

Education
Main article: Education in France
Bibliothèque nationale et universitaire at Strasbourg, stone building with portico by a park
The National and University Library on the campus of the University of Strasbourg.
In 1802, Napoleon created the lycée.[280] Nevertheless, it is Jules Ferry who is considered to be the father of the French modern school, which is free, secular, and compulsory until the age of 13 since 1882[281] (school attendance in France is now compulsory until the age of 16[282]).

Nowadays, the schooling system in France is centralised, and is composed of three stages, primary education, secondary education, and higher education. The Programme for International Student Assessment, coordinated by the OECD, ranked France's education as about the OECD average in 2015.[283] Primary and secondary education are predominantly public, run by the Ministry of National Education. In France, education is compulsory from six to sixteen years old, and the public school is secular and free. While training and remuneration of teachers and the curriculum are the responsibility of the state centrally, the management of primary and secondary schools is overseen by local authorities. Primary education comprises two phases, nursery school (école maternelle) and elementary school (école élémentaire). Nursery school aims to stimulate the minds of very young children and promote their socialisation and development of a basic grasp of language and number. Around the age of six, children transfer to elementary school, whose primary objectives are learning about writing, arithmetic and citizenship. Secondary education also consists of two phases. The first is delivered through colleges (collège) and leads to the national certificate (Diplôme national du brevet (fr)). The second is offered in high schools (lycée) and finishes in national exams leading to a baccalaureate (baccalauréat, available in professional, technical or general flavours) or certificate of professional competence (certificat d'aptitude professionelle).

Higher education is divided between public universities and the prestigious and selective Grandes écoles, such as Sciences Po Paris for Political studies, HEC Paris for Economics, Polytechnique and the École nationale supérieure des mines de Paris that produce high-profile engineers, or the École nationale d'administration for careers in the Grands Corps of the state. The Grandes écoles have been criticised for alleged elitism;[284] they have produced many if not most of France's high-ranking civil servants, CEOs, and politicians.

Since higher education is funded by the state, the fees are very low; tuition fees vary from €150 to €700 depending on the university and the different levels of education (licence, master, doctorate). One can therefore get a master's degree (in 5 years) for about €750–3,500. The tuition fees in public engineering schools are comparable to universities, albeit a little higher (around €700). However they can reach €7000 a year for private engineering schools, while business schools, which are all private or partially private, charge up to €15000 a year. Health insurance for students is free until the age of 20.

Culture
Main article: Culture of France
Château de Chenonceau in the Loire valley, the castle that spans the river with a round keep, and garden
Château de Chenonceau in the Loire valley
France has been a centre of Western cultural development for centuries. Many French artists have been among the most renowned of their time, and France is still recognised in the world for its rich cultural tradition.

The successive political regimes have always promoted artistic creation, and the creation of the Ministry of Culture in 1959 helped preserve the cultural heritage of the country and make it available to the public. The Ministry of Culture has been very active since its creation, granting subsidies to artists, promoting French culture in the world, supporting festivals and cultural events, protecting historical monuments. The French government also succeeded in maintaining a cultural exception to defend audiovisual products made in the country.

France receives the highest number of tourists per year, largely thanks to the numerous cultural establishments and historical buildings implanted all over the territory. It counts 1,200 museums welcoming more than 50 million people annually.[285] The most important cultural sites are run by the government, for instance through the public agency Centre des monuments nationaux, which is responsible for approximately 85 national historical monuments.

The 43,180 buildings protected as historical monuments include mainly residences (many castles, or châteaux in French) and religious buildings (cathedrals, basilicas, churches, etc.), but also statutes, memorials and gardens. The UNESCO inscribed 41 sites in France on the World Heritage List.[286]

Art
Main article: French art
painting by Claude Monet of woman with parasol facing left in field from the Musée d'Orsay
Claude Monet founded the Impressionist movement (Femme avec un parasol, 1886, Musée d'Orsay).
The origins of French art were very much influenced by Flemish art and by Italian art at the time of the Renaissance. Jean Fouquet, the most famous medieval French painter, is said to have been the first to travel to Italy and experience the Early Renaissance at first hand. The Renaissance painting School of Fontainebleau was directly inspired by Italian painters such as Primaticcio and Rosso Fiorentino, who both worked in France. Two of the most famous French artists of the time of Baroque era, Nicolas Poussin and Claude Lorrain, lived in Italy.

The 17th century was the period when French painting became prominent and individualised itself through classicism. Louis XIV's prime minister Jean-Baptiste Colbert founded in 1648 the Royal Academy of Painting and Sculpture to protect these artists, and in 1666 he created the still-active French Academy in Rome to have direct relations with Italian artists.

The Thinker bronze statue from 1902 from the Musée Rodin, Paris
Le Penseur by Auguste Rodin (1902), Musée Rodin, Paris.
French artists developed the rococo style in the 18th century, as a more intimate imitation of old baroque style, the works of the court-endorsed artists Antoine Watteau, François Boucher and Jean-Honoré Fragonard being the most representative in the country. The French Revolution brought great changes, as Napoleon favoured artists of neoclassic style such as Jacques-Louis David and the highly influential Académie des Beaux-Arts defined the style known as Academism. At this time France had become a centre of artistic creation, the first half of the 19th century being dominated by two successive movements, at first Romanticism with Théodore Géricault and Eugène Delacroix, and Realism with Camille Corot, Gustave Courbet and Jean-François Millet, a style that eventually evolved into Naturalism.

In the second part of the 19th century, France's influence over painting became even more important, with the development of new styles of painting such as Impressionism and Symbolism. The most famous impressionist painters of the period were Camille Pissarro, Édouard Manet, Edgar Degas, Claude Monet and Auguste Renoir.[287] The second generation of impressionist-style painters, Paul Cézanne, Paul Gauguin, Toulouse-Lautrec and Georges Seurat, were also at the avant-garde of artistic evolutions,[288] as well as the fauvist artists Henri Matisse, André Derain and Maurice de Vlaminck.[289][290]

At the beginning of the 20th century, Cubism was developed by Georges Braque and the Spanish painter Pablo Picasso, living in Paris. Other foreign artists also settled and worked in or near Paris, such as Vincent van Gogh, Marc Chagall, Amedeo Modigliani and Wassily Kandinsky.

Mona Lisa, La Joconde in the Louvre Museum
Italian artist Leonardo da Vinci's Mona Lisa is the World's best known work of art,[291] on permanent display at the Louvre, the World's most visited museum.[292]
Many museums in France are entirely or partly devoted to sculptures and painting works. A huge collection of old masterpieces created before or during the 18th century are displayed in the state-owned Musée du Louvre, such as Mona Lisa, also known as La Joconde. While the Louvre Palace has been for a long time a museum, the Musée d'Orsay was inaugurated in 1986 in the old railway station Gare d'Orsay, in a major reorganisation of national art collections, to gather French paintings from the second part of the 19th century (mainly Impressionism and Fauvism movements).[293][294]

Modern works are presented in the Musée National d'Art Moderne, which moved in 1976 to the Centre Georges Pompidou. These three state-owned museums welcome close to 17 million people a year.[295] Other national museums hosting paintings include the Grand Palais (1.3 million visitors in 2008), but there are also many museums owned by cities, the most visited being the Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris (0.8 million entries in 2008), which hosts contemporary works.[295]

Outside Paris, all the large cities have a Museum of Fine Arts with a section dedicated to European and French painting. Some of the finest collections are in Lyon, Lille, Rouen, Dijon, Rennes and Grenoble.

Architecture
Main article: French architecture
Sainte Chapelle interior showing painted stonework vaulting and stained glass
Saint Louis' Sainte Chapelle represents the French impact on religious architecture.
During the Middle Ages, many fortified castles were built by feudal nobles to mark their powers. Some French castles that survived are Chinon, Château d'Angers, the massive Château de Vincennes and the so-called Cathar castles. During this era, France had been using Romanesque architecture like most of Western Europe. Some of the greatest examples of Romanesque churches in France are the Saint Sernin Basilica in Toulouse, the largest romanesque church in Europe,[296] and the remains of the Cluniac Abbey.

The Gothic architecture, originally named Opus Francigenum meaning "French work",[297] was born in Île-de-France and was the first French style of architecture to be copied in all Europe.[298] Northern France is the home of some of the most important Gothic cathedrals and basilicas, the first of these being the Saint Denis Basilica (used as the royal necropolis); other important French Gothic cathedrals are Notre-Dame de Chartres and Notre-Dame d'Amiens. The kings were crowned in another important Gothic church: Notre-Dame de Reims.[299] Aside from churches, Gothic Architecture had been used for many religious palaces, the most important one being the Palais des Papes in Avignon.

The final victory in the Hundred Years' War marked an important stage in the evolution of French architecture. It was the time of the French Renaissance and several artists from Italy were invited to the French court; many residential palaces were built in the Loire Valley. Such residential castles were the Château de Chambord, the Château de Chenonceau, or the Château d'Amboise.

Following the renaissance and the end of the Middle Ages, Baroque architecture replaced the traditional Gothic style. However, in France, baroque architecture found a greater success in the secular domain than in a religious one.[300] In the secular domain, the Palace of Versailles has many baroque features. Jules Hardouin Mansart, who designed the extensions to Versailles, was one of the most influential French architect of the baroque era; he is famous for his dome at Les Invalides.[301] Some of the most impressive provincial baroque architecture is found in places that were not yet French such as the Place Stanislas in Nancy. On the military architectural side, Vauban designed some of the most efficient fortresses in Europe and became an influential military architect; as a result, imitations of his works can be found all over Europe, the Americas, Russia and Turkey.[302][303]

After the Revolution, the Republicans favoured Neoclassicism although neoclassicism was introduced in France prior to the revolution with such building as the Parisian Pantheon or the Capitole de Toulouse. Built during the first French Empire, the Arc de Triomphe and Sainte Marie-Madeleine represent the best example of Empire style architecture.[304]

Opéra Garnier interior showing chandeliers and gilded decoration
Opéra Garnier, Paris, a symbol of the French Second Empire style
Under Napoleon III, a new wave of urbanism and architecture was given birth; extravagant buildings such as the neo-baroque Palais Garnier were built. The urban planning of the time was very organised and rigorous; for example, Haussmann's renovation of Paris. The architecture associated to this era is named Second Empire in English, the term being taken from the Second French Empire. At this time there was a strong Gothic resurgence across Europe and in France; the associated architect was Eugène Viollet-le-Duc. In the late 19th century, Gustave Eiffel designed many bridges, such as Garabit viaduct, and remains one of the most influential bridge designers of his time, although he is best remembered for the iconic Eiffel Tower.

In the 20th century, French-Swiss architect Le Corbusier designed several buildings in France. More recently, French architects have combined both modern and old architectural styles. The Louvre Pyramid is an example of modern architecture added to an older building. The most difficult buildings to integrate within French cities are skyscrapers, as they are visible from afar. For instance, in Paris, since 1977, new buildings had to be under 37 meters (121 feet).[305] France's largest financial district is La Defense, where a significant number of skyscrapers are located.[306] Other massive buildings that are a challenge to integrate into their environment are large bridges; an example of the way this has been done is the Millau Viaduct. Some famous modern French architects include Jean Nouvel, Dominique Perrault, Christian de Portzamparc or Paul Andreu.

Literature
Main article: French literature
The earliest French literature dates from the Middle Ages, when what is now known as modern France did not have a single, uniform language. There were several languages and dialects and writers used their own spelling and grammar. Some authors of French mediaeval texts are unknown, such as Tristan and Iseult and Lancelot-Grail. Other authors are known, for example Chrétien de Troyes and Duke William IX of Aquitaine, who wrote in Occitan.

Much medieval French poetry and literature were inspired by the legends of the Matter of France, such as The Song of Roland and the various chansons de geste. The Roman de Renart, written in 1175 by Perrout de Saint Cloude, tells the story of the mediaeval character Reynard ('the Fox') and is another example of early French writing.

An important 16th-century writer was François Rabelais, whose novel Gargantua and Pantagruel has remained famous and appreciated until now. Michel de Montaigne was the other major figure of the French literature during that century. His most famous work, Essais, created the literary genre of the essay.[307] French poetry during that century was embodied by Pierre de Ronsard and Joachim du Bellay. Both writers founded the La Pléiade literary movement.

During the 17th century, Madame de La Fayette published anonymously La Princesse de Clèves, a novel that is considered to be one of the very first psychological novels of all times.[308] Jean de La Fontaine is one of the most famous fabulist of that time, as he wrote hundreds of fables, some being far more famous than others, such as The Ant and the Grasshopper. Generations of French pupils had to learn his fables, that were seen as helping teaching wisdom and common sense to the young people. Some of his verses have entered the popular language to become proverbs, such as "À l'œuvre, on connaît l'artisan."[A workman is known by his chips].[309]

see description
French literary figures. Clockwise from top left: Molière is the most played author in the Comédie-Française;[310] Victor Hugo is one of the most important French novelists and poets; 19th-century poet, writer, and translator Charles Baudelaire; 20th-century philosopher and novelist Jean-Paul Sartre.
Jean Racine, whose incredible mastery of the alexandrine and of the French language has been praised for centuries, created plays such as Phèdre or Britannicus. He is, along with Pierre Corneille (Le Cid) and Molière, considered as one of the three great dramatists of the France's golden age. Molière, who is deemed to be one of the greatest masters of comedy of the Western literature,[311] wrote dozens of plays, including Le Misanthrope, L'Avare, Le Malade imaginaire, and Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme. His plays have been so popular around the world that French language is sometimes dubbed as "the language of Molière" (la langue de Molière),[312] just like English is considered as "the language of Shakespeare".

French literature and poetry flourished even more in the 18th and 19th centuries. Denis Diderot's best-known works are Jacques the Fatalist and Rameau's Nephew. He is however best known for being the main redactor of the Encyclopédie, whose aim was to sum up all the knowledge of his century (in fields such as arts, sciences, languages, philosophy) and to present them to the people, in order to fight ignorance and obscurantism. During that same century, Charles Perrault was a prolific writer of famous children's fairy tales including Puss in Boots, Cinderella, Sleeping Beauty and Bluebeard. At the start of the 19th century, symbolist poetry was an important movement in French literature, with poets such as Charles Baudelaire, Paul Verlaine and Stéphane Mallarmé.[313]

The 19th century saw the writings of many renowned French authors. Victor Hugo is sometimes seen as "the greatest French writer of all times"[314] for excelling in all literary genres. The preface of his play Cromwell is considered to be the manifesto of the Romantic movement. Les Contemplations and La Légende des siècles are considered as "poetic masterpieces",[315] Hugo's verse having been compared to that of Shakespeare, Dante and Homer.[315] His novel Les Misérables is widely seen as one of the greatest novel ever written[316] and The Hunchback of Notre Dame has remained immensely popular.

Other major authors of that century include Alexandre Dumas (The Three Musketeers and The Count of Monte-Cristo), Jules Verne (Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea), Émile Zola (Les Rougon-Macquart), Honoré de Balzac (La Comédie humaine), Guy de Maupassant, Théophile Gautier and Stendhal (The Red and the Black, The Charterhouse of Parma), whose works are among the most well known in France and the world.

The Prix Goncourt is a French literary prize first awarded in 1903.[317] Important writers of the 20th century include Marcel Proust, Louis-Ferdinand Céline, Albert Camus, and Jean-Paul Sartre. Antoine de Saint Exupéry wrote Little Prince, which has remained popular for decades with children and adults around the world.[318] As of 2014, French authors had more Literature Nobel Prizes than those of any other nation.[319] The first Nobel Prize in Literature was a French author, while France's latest Nobel prize in literature is Patrick Modiano, who was awarded the prize in 2014.[319] Jean-Paul Sartre was also the first nominee in the committee's history to refuse the prize in 1964.[319]

Philosophy
Main article: French philosophy
Medieval philosophy was dominated by Scholasticism until the emergence of Humanism in the Renaissance. Modern philosophy began in France in the 17th century with the philosophy of René Descartes, Blaise Pascal, and Nicolas Malebranche. Descartes revitalised Western philosophy, which had been declined after the Greek and Roman eras.[320] His Meditations on First Philosophy changed the primary object of philosophical thought and raised some of the most fundamental problems for foreigners such as Spinoza, Leibniz, Hume, Berkeley, and Kant.

Frans Hals painting of René Descartes facing right in black coat and white collar
René Descartes, founder of modern philosophy.
French philosophers produced some of the most important political works of the Age of Enlightenment. In The Spirit of the Laws, Baron de Montesquieu theorised the principle of separation of powers, which has been implemented in all liberal democracies since it was first applied in the United States. Voltaire came to embody the Enlightenment with his defence of civil liberties, such as the right to a free trial and freedom of religion.

19th-century French thought was targeted at responding to the social malaise following the French Revolution. Rationalist philosophers such as Victor Cousin and Auguste Comte, who called for a new social doctrine, were opposed by reactionary thinkers such as Joseph de Maistre, Louis de Bonald and Félicité Robert de Lamennais, who blamed the rationalist rejection of traditional order. De Maistre is considered, together with the Englishman Edmund Burke, one of the founders of European conservatism, while Comte is regarded as the founder of positivism, which Émile Durkheim reformulated as a basis for social research.

In the 20th century, partly as a reaction to the perceived excesses of positivism, French spiritualism thrived with thinkers such as Henri Bergson and it influenced American pragmatism and Whitehead's version of process philosophy. Meanwhile, French epistemology became a prominent school of thought with Jules Henri Poincaré, Gaston Bachelard, Jean Cavaillès and Jules Vuillemin. Influenced by German phenomenology and existentialism, the philosophy of Jean-Paul Sartre gained a strong influence after World War II, and late-20th-century-France became the craddle of postmodern philosophy with Jean-François Lyotard, Jean Baudrillard, Jacques Derrida and Michel Foucault.

Music
Main article: Music of France
head shot of Serge Gainsbourg
Serge Gainsbourg, one of the world's most influential popular musicians.[321]
France has a long and varied musical history. It experienced a golden age in the 17th century thanks to Louis XIV, who employed a number of talented musicians and composers in the royal court. The most renowned composers of this period include Marc-Antoine Charpentier, François Couperin, Michel-Richard Delalande, Jean-Baptiste Lully and Marin Marais, all of them composers at the court. After the death of the "Roi Soleil", French musical creation lost dynamism, but in the next century the music of Jean-Philippe Rameau reached some prestige, and today he is still one of the most renowned French composers. Rameau became the dominant composer of French opera and the leading French composer for the harpsichord.[322][full citation needed]

French composers played an important role during the music of the 19th and early 20th century, which is considered to be the Romantic music era. Romantic music emphasised a surrender to nature, a fascination with the past and the supernatural, the exploration of unusual, strange and surprising sounds, and a focus on national identity. This period was also a golden age for operas. French composers from the Romantic era included: Hector Berlioz (best known for his Symphonie fantastique), Georges Bizet (best known for Carmen, which has become one of the most popular and frequently performed operas), Gabriel Fauré (best known for his Pavane, Requiem, and nocturnes), Charles Gounod (best known for his Ave Maria and his opera Faust), Jacques Offenbach (best known for his 100 operettas of the 1850s–1870s and his uncompleted opera The Tales of Hoffmann), Édouard Lalo (best known for his Symphonie espagnole for violin and orchestra and his Cello Concerto in D minor), Jules Massenet (best known for his operas, of which he wrote more than thirty, the most frequently staged are Manon (1884) and Werther (1892)) and Camille Saint-Saëns (he has many frequently-performed works, including The Carnival of the Animals, Danse macabre, Samson and Delilah (Opera), Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso, and his Symphony No. 3 (Organ Symphony)).

Later came precursors of modern classical music. Érik Satie was a key member of the early 20th century Parisian avant-garde, best known for his Gymnopédies. Francis Poulenc's best known works are his piano suite Trois mouvements perpétuels (1919), the ballet Les biches (1923), the Concert champêtre (1928) for harpsichord and orchestra, the opera Dialogues des Carmélites (1957), and the Gloria (1959) for soprano, choir and orchestra. Maurice Ravel and Claude Debussy are the most prominent figures associated with Impressionist music. Debussy was among the most influential composers of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and his use of non-traditional scales and chromaticism influenced many composers who followed.[323] Debussy's music is noted for its sensory content and frequent usage of atonality. The two composers invented new musical forms[324][325][326][327] and new sounds. Ravel's piano compositions, such as Jeux d'eau, Miroirs, Le tombeau de Couperin and Gaspard de la nuit, demand considerable virtuosity. His mastery of orchestration is evident in the Rapsodie espagnole, Daphnis et Chloé, his arrangement of Modest Mussorgsky's Pictures at an Exhibition and his orchestral work Boléro (1928).

More recently, at the middle of the 20th century, Maurice Ohana, Pierre Schaeffer and Pierre Boulez contributed to the evolutions of contemporary classical music.[328]

Daft Punk at O2 Wireless Festival, helmeted musicians at keyboard
Daft Punk, pioneers of the French house.
French music then followed the rapid emergence of pop and rock music at the middle of the 20th century. Although English-speaking creations achieved popularity in the country, French pop music, known as chanson française, has also remained very popular. Among the most important French artists of the century are Édith Piaf, Georges Brassens, Léo Ferré, Charles Aznavour and Serge Gainsbourg. Although there are very few rock bands in France compared to English-speaking countries,[329] bands such as Noir Désir, Mano Negra, Niagara, Les Rita Mitsouko and more recently Superbus, Phoenix and Gojira,[330] or Shaka Ponk, have reached worldwide popularity.

Other French artists with international careers have been popular in several countries, for example female singers Dalida, Mireille Mathieu, Mylène Farmer[330] and Nolwenn Leroy,[331] electronic music pioneers Jean-Michel Jarre, Laurent Garnier and Bob Sinclar, and later Martin Solveig and David Guetta. In the 1990s and 2000s (decade), electronic duos Daft Punk, Justice and Air also reached worldwide popularity and contributed to the reputation of modern electronic music in the world.[330][332][333]

Among current musical events and institutions in France, many are dedicated to classical music and operas. The most prestigious institutions are the state-owned Paris National Opera (with its two sites Palais Garnier and Opéra Bastille), the Opéra National de Lyon, the Théâtre du Châtelet in Paris, the Théâtre du Capitole in Toulouse and the Grand Théâtre de Bordeaux. As for music festivals, there are several events organised, the most popular being the Eurockéennes (a word play which sounds in French as "European") and Rock en Seine. The Fête de la Musique, imitated by many foreign cities, was first launched by the French government in 1982.[334][335] Major music halls and venues in France include Le Zénith sites present in many cities and other places in Paris (Paris Olympia, Théâtre Mogador, Élysée Montmartre, etc.).

Cinema
Main article: Cinema of France
Palme d'Or award in presentation case
A Palme d'Or from the Cannes Film Festival, one of the "Big Three" film festivals alongside the Venice Film Festival and Berlin International Film Festival.[336][337][338]
France has historical and strong links with cinema, with two Frenchmen, Auguste and Louis Lumière (known as the Lumière Brothers) having created cinema in 1895.[339] Several important cinematic movements, including the late 1950s and 60s Nouvelle Vague, began in the country. It is noted for having a strong film industry, due in part to protections afforded by the French government. France remains a leader in filmmaking, as of 2015 producing more films than any other European country.[340][341] The nation also hosts the Cannes Festival, one of the most important and famous film festivals in the world.[342][343]

Apart from its strong and innovative film tradition, France has also been a gathering spot for artists from across Europe and the world. For this reason, French cinema is sometimes intertwined with the cinema of foreign nations. Directors from nations such as Poland (Roman Polanski, Krzysztof Kieslowski, and Andrzej Zulawski), Argentina (Gaspar Noé and Edgardo Cozarinsky), Russia (Alexandre Alexeieff, Anatole Litvak), Austria (Michael Haneke), and Georgia (Géla Babluani, Otar Iosseliani) are prominent in the ranks of French cinema. Conversely, French directors have had prolific and influential careers in other countries, such as Luc Besson, Jacques Tourneur, or Francis Veber in the United States.

Although the French film market is dominated by Hollywood, France is the only nation in the world where American films make up the smallest share of total film revenues, at 50%, compared with 77% in Germany and 69% in Japan.[344] French films account for 35% of the total film revenues of France, which is the highest percentage of national film revenues in the developed world outside the United States, compared to 14% in Spain and 8% in the UK.[344] France is in 2013 the 2nd exporter of films in the world after the United States.[345]

Until recently, France had for centuries been the cultural center of the world,[247] although its dominant position has been surpassed by the United States. Subsequently, France takes steps in protecting and promoting its culture, becoming a leading advocate of the cultural exception.[346] The nation succeeded in convincing all EU members to refuse to include culture and audiovisuals in the list of liberalised sectors of the WTO in 1993.[347] Moreover, this decision was confirmed in a voting in the UNESCO in 2005, and the principle of "cultural exception" won an overwhelming victory: 198 countries voted for it, only 2 countries, the U.S and Israel, voted against it.[348]

Fashion
Main article: French fashion
Chanel's headquarters storefront window at the Place Vendôme Paris with awning
Chanel's headquarters on the Place Vendôme, Paris.
Fashion has been an important industry and cultural export of France since the 17th century, and modern "haute couture" originated in Paris in the 1860s. Today, Paris, along with London, Milan, and New York City, is considered one of the world's fashion capitals, and the city is home or headquarters to many of the premier fashion houses. The expression Haute couture is, in France, a legally protected name, guaranteeing certain quality standards.

The association of France with fashion and style (French: la mode) dates largely to the reign of Louis XIV[349] when the luxury goods industries in France came increasingly under royal control and the French royal court became, arguably, the arbiter of taste and style in Europe. But France renewed its dominance of the high fashion (French: couture or haute couture) industry in the years 1860–1960 through the establishing of the great couturier houses such as Chanel, Dior, and Givenchy. The French perfume industry is world leader in its sector and is centered on the town of Grasse.[350]

In the 1960s, the elitist "Haute couture" came under criticism from France's youth culture. In 1966, the designer Yves Saint Laurent broke with established Haute Couture norms by launching a prêt-à-porter ("ready to wear") line and expanding French fashion into mass manufacturing. With a greater focus on marketing and manufacturing, new trends were established by Sonia Rykiel, Thierry Mugler, Claude Montana, Jean-Paul Gaultier and Christian Lacroix in the 1970s and 1980s. The 1990s saw a conglomeration of many French couture houses under luxury giants and multinationals such as LVMH.

Media
Main article: Telecommunications in France
masthead of Le Figaro newspaper
Le Figaro was founded in 1826; many of France's most prominent authors have written in its columns over the decades, and it is still considered a newspaper of record.[351]
Compared to other developed countries, the French do not spend much time reading newspapers, due to the popularity of broadcast media. Best-selling daily national newspapers in France are Le Parisien Aujourd'hui en France (with 460,000 sold daily), Le Monde and Le Figaro, with around 300,000 copies sold daily, but also L'Équipe, dedicated to sports coverage.[352] In the past years, free dailies made a breakthrough, with Metro, 20 Minutes and Direct Plus distributed at more than 650,000 copies respectively.[353] However, the widest circulations are reached by regional daily Ouest France with more than 750,000 copies sold, and the 50 other regional papers have also high sales.[354][355] The sector of weekly magazines is stronger and diversified with more than 400 specialised weekly magazines published in the country.[356]

The most influential news magazines are the left-wing Le Nouvel Observateur, centrist L'Express and right-wing Le Point (more than 400.000 copies),[357] but the highest circulation for weeklies is reached by TV magazines and by women's magazines, among them Marie Claire and ELLE, which have foreign versions. Influential weeklies also include investigative and satirical papers Le Canard Enchaîné and Charlie Hebdo, as well as Paris Match. Like in most industrialised nations, the print media have been affected by a severe crisis in the past decade. In 2008, the government launched a major initiative to help the sector reform and become financially independent,[358][359] but in 2009 it had to give 600,000 euros to help the print media cope with the economic crisis, in addition to existing subsidies.[360]

In 1974, after years of centralised monopoly on radio and television, the governmental agency ORTF was split into several national institutions, but the three already-existing TV channels and four national radio stations[361][362] remained under state-control. It was only in 1981 that the government allowed free broadcasting in the territory, ending state monopoly on radio.[362] French television was partly liberalised in the next two decade with the creation of several commercial channels, mainly thanks to cable and satellite television. In 2005 the national service Télévision Numérique Terrestre introduced digital television all over the territory, allowing the creation of other channels.

The four existing national channels are now owned by state-owned consortium France Télévisions, while public broadcasting group Radio France run five national radio stations. Among these public media are Radio France Internationale, which broadcasts programmes in French all over the world, and Franco-German TV channel TV5 Monde. In 2006, the government created global news channel France 24. Long-established TV channels TF1 (privatised in 1987), France 2 and France 3 have the highest shares, while radio stations RTL, Europe 1 and state-owned France Inter are the least listened to.

Society
Eugène Delacroix painting La Liberté guidant le peuple, woman at barricades holding French flag and advancing
Marianne, in a painting by Eugène Delacroix, La Liberté guidant le peuple (Liberty Leading the People) (1830)
According to a BBC poll in 2010, based on 29,977 responses in 28 countries, France is globally seen as a positive influence in the world's affairs: 49% have a positive view of the country's influence, whereas 19% have a negative view.[363][364] The Nation Brand Index of 2008 suggested that France has the second best international reputation, only behind Germany.[365]

Gallic rooster stone statue the Memorial of the soldiers and sailors of the Lower Charente
A Gallic rooster on top of a war memorial in La Rochelle
According to a poll in 2011, the French were found to have the highest level of religious tolerance and to be the country where the highest proportion of the population defines its identity primarily in term of nationality and not religion.[366] As of 2011, 75% of French had a favourable view of the US, making France one of the most pro-American countries in the world.[367] As of 2017, the favourable view of the US had dropped to 46%.[368]

In January 2010, the magazine International Living ranked France as "best country to live in", ahead of 193 other countries, for the fifth year running.[369]

The French Revolution continues to permeate the country's collective memory. The tricolour Flag of France,[370] the anthem "La Marseillaise", and the motto Liberté, egalité, fraternité, defined in Title 1 of the Constitution as national symbols, all emerged during the cultural ferment of the early revolution, along with Marianne, a common national personification. In addition, Bastille Day, the national holiday, commemorates the storming of the Bastille on 14 July 1789.[371]

A common and traditional symbol of the French people is the Gallic rooster. Its origins date back to Antiquity, since the Latin word Gallus meant both "rooster" and "inhabitant of Gaul". Then this figure gradually became the most widely shared representation of the French, used by French monarchs, then by the Revolution and under the successive republican regimes as representation of the national identity, used for some stamps and coins.[372]

Cuisine
Main article: French cuisine
French cuisine is renowned for being one of the finest in the world.[373][374] According to the regions, traditional recipes are different, the North of the country prefers to use butter as the preferred fat for cooking, whereas olive oil is more commonly used in the South.[375] Moreover, each region of France has iconic traditional specialities: Cassoulet in the Southwest, Choucroute in Alsace, Quiche in the Lorraine region, Beef bourguignon in the Bourgogne, provençal Tapenade, etc. France's most renowned products are wines,[376] including Champagne, Bordeaux, Bourgogne, and Beaujolais as well as a large variety of different cheeses, such as Camembert, Roquefort and Brie. There are more than 400 different varieties.[377][378]

A meal often consists of three courses, hors d'œuvre or entrée (introductory course, sometimes soup), plat principal (main course), fromage (cheese course) and/or dessert, sometimes with a salad offered before the cheese or dessert. Hors d'œuvres include terrine de saumon au basilic, lobster bisque, foie gras, French onion soup or a croque monsieur. The plat principal could include a pot au feu or steak frites. The dessert could be mille-feuille pastry, a macaron, an éclair, crème brûlée, mousse au chocolat, crêpes, or Café liégeois.


French wines are usually made to accompany French cuisine

 

Some French cheeses with fruits

 

Crème brûlée

 

Quiche

 

Macaron

French cuisine is also regarded as a key element of the quality of life and the attractiveness of France.[369] A French publication, the Michelin guide, awards Michelin stars for excellence to a select few establishments.[379][380] The acquisition or loss of a star can have dramatic effects on the success of a restaurant. By 2006, the Michelin Guide had awarded 620 stars to French restaurants, at that time more than any other country, although the guide also inspects more restaurants in France than in any other country (by 2010, Japan was awarded as many Michelin stars as France, despite having half the number of Michelin inspectors working there).[381][382]

In addition to its wine tradition, France is also a major producer of beer and rum. The three main French brewing regions are Alsace (60% of national production), Nord-Pas-de-Calais and Lorraine. A meal often consists of three courses, hors d'œuvre or entrée (introductory course, sometimes soup), plat principal (main course), fromage (cheese course) or dessert, sometimes with a salad offered before the cheese or dessert.[383] France produces rum via distilleries located on islands such as Reunion Island in the southern Indian Ocean.

Sports
Main article: Sport in France
Tour de France pelleton 9 July 2005 at the begin of the ascend to Cote de Bad Herrenalb
Starting in 1903, the Tour de France is the oldest and most prestigious of Grands Tours, and the world's most famous cycling race.[384]
Popular sports played in France include football, judo, tennis,[385] rugby[386] and pétanque. France has hosted events such as the 1938 and 1998 FIFA World Cups,[387] and the 2007 Rugby World Cup.[388] and will host the 2023 Rugby World Cup following the announcement on Wednesday, 15 November 2017 at London at 13:00 ( GMT). The country also hosted UEFA Euro 2016. The Stade de France in Saint-Denis is France's largest stadium and was the venue for the 1998 FIFA World Cup and 2007 Rugby World Cup finals. Since 1903, France hosts the annual Tour de France, the most famous road bicycle race in the world.[389][390] France is famous for its 24 Hours of Le Mans sports car endurance race.[391] Several major tennis tournaments take place in France, including the Paris Masters and the French Open, one of the four Grand Slam tournaments. French martial arts include Savate and Fencing.

France has a close association with the Modern Olympic Games; it was a French aristocrat, Baron Pierre de Coubertin, who suggested the Games' revival, at the end of the 19th century.[392][393] After Athens was awarded the first Games, in reference to the Olympics' Greek origins, Paris hosted the second Games in 1900.[394] Paris was the first home of the International Olympic Committee, before it moved to Lausanne.[395] Since 1900, France has hosted the Olympics on 4 further occasions: the 1924 Summer Olympics, again in Paris[393] and three Winter Games (1924 in Chamonix, 1968 in Grenoble and 1992 in Albertville).[393]

soccer match at the Stade de France for the 1998 FIFA World Cup
The Stade de France was built for the 1998 FIFA World Cup, and is listed as a UEFA category four stadium.
Both the national football team and the national rugby union team are nicknamed "Les Bleus" in reference to the team's shirt colour as well as the national French tricolour flag. Football is the most popular sport in France, with over 1,800,000 registered players, and over 18,000 registered clubs.[396] The football team is among the most successful in the world, particularly at the start of the 21st century, with one FIFA World Cup victory in 1998,[397] one FIFA World Cup second place in 2006,[398] and two UEFA European Championships in 1984[399] and 2000.[400] The top national football club competition is Ligue 1. France has produced some of the greatest players in the world, including three time FIFA World Player of the Year Zinedine Zidane, three time Ballon d'Or recipient Michel Platini, record holder for most goals scored at a World Cup Just Fontaine, first football player to receive the Légion d'honneur Raymond Kopa, and the all-time leading goalscorer for the French national team Thierry Henry.[401]

Rugby union is popular, particularly in Paris and the southwest of France.[402] The national rugby union team has competed at every Rugby World Cup, and takes part in the annual Six Nations Championship. Stemming from a strong domestic league, the French rugby team has won 16 Six Nations Championships, including 8 grand slams; and has reached the semi-final of the Rugby World Cup 6 times and the final 3 times.

Rugby league in France is mostly played and followed in the South of France, in cities such as Perpignan and Toulouse. The Catalans Dragons and Toulouse Olympique are the most notable clubs currently playing in Super League and the RFL Championship is the top-tier rugby league competitions in Europe. The Elite One Championship is the professional competition for rugby league clubs in France. Paris Saint-Germain Rugby League competed in Super League's inaugural 1996 season and for another in 1997 before going defunct.

In recent decades, France has produced world-elite basketball players, most notably Tony Parker. The French National Basketball Team won gold at the FIBA EuroBasket 2013. The national team has won two Olympic Silver Medals: in 2000 and 1948.

See also
Outline of France
France in the 1920s
Footnotes
Jump up ^ For information about regional languages see Languages of France.
Jump up ^ Established the Kingdom of the West Franks (the Kingdom of France) from the Carolingian Empire of Francia.
Jump up ^ European Union since 1993.
Jump up ^ Established the Fifth Republic
Jump up ^ French National Geographic Institute data, which includes bodies of water.
Jump up ^ French Land Register data, which exclude lakes, ponds and glaciers larger than 1 km² (0.386 sq mi or 247 acres) as well as the estuaries of rivers.
Jump up ^ Whole of the French Republic except the overseas territories in the Pacific Ocean.
Jump up ^ French overseas territories in the Pacific Ocean only.
Jump up ^ Time zones across the French Republic span from UTC-10 (French Polynesia) to UTC+12 (Wallis and Futuna).
Jump up ^ Daylight saving time is observed in metropolitan France and Saint Pierre and Miquelon only.
Jump up ^ The overseas regions and collectivities form part of the French telephone numbering plan, but have their own country calling codes: Guadeloupe +590; Martinique +596; French Guiana +594, Réunion and Mayotte +262; Saint Pierre and Miquelon +508. The overseas territories are not part of the French telephone numbering plan; their country calling codes are: New Caledonia +687, French Polynesia +689; Wallis and Futuna +681.
Jump up ^ In addition to .fr, several other Internet TLDs are used in French overseas départements and territories: .re, .mq, .gp, .tf, .nc, .pf, .wf, .pm, .gf and .yt. France also uses .eu, shared with other members of the European Union. The .cat domain is used in Catalan-speaking territories.
Jump up ^ French Guiana is located in South America; Guadeloupe and Martinique are in the Caribbean Sea; and Réunion and Mayotte are in the Indian Ocean, off the coast of Africa. All five are considered integral parts of the republic. France also comprises Saint Pierre and Miquelon in North America; Saint Barthélemy and Saint Martin in the Caribbean; French Polynesia, New Caledonia, Wallis and Futuna and Clipperton Island in the Pacific Ocean; and finally the French Southern and Antarctic Lands.
Jump up ^ The present-day state of Austria did not exist as such, its territory was part of the Habsburg Monarchy which also comprised the present-day states of Hungary, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Belgium, Slovenia and Croatia: that Habsburg Monarchy was usually called 'Austria'.
Jump up ^ The last sacre was that of Charles X, 29 May 1825.
References
Jump up ^ "Résultats de la recherche". Insee. Archived from the original on 5 April 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b c d "A French Islam is possible" (PDF). Institut Montaigne. 2016. p. 13. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 September 2017.
Jump up ^ "Table 3: Population by sex, rate of population increase, surface area and density" (PDF). Demographic Yearbook. United Nations Statistics Division. 2012. Retrieved 4 September 2017.
Jump up ^ "France Métropolitaine". INSEE. 2011. Archived from the original on 28 August 2015.
Jump up ^ "Demography - Population at the beginning of the month - France (including Mayotte since 2014)". Insee. 3 January 2018. Retrieved 7 January 2018.
Jump up ^ "Demography - Population at the beginning of the month - Metropolitan France". Insee. 3 January 2018. Retrieved 7 January 2018.
^ Jump up to: a b c d "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects: France". World Economic Outlook. International Monetary Fund. October 2017. Retrieved 30 November 2017.
Jump up ^ "Field Listing :: Distribution of Family Income – GINI Index". The World Factbook. CIA.
Jump up ^ "2016 Human Development Report" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2016. Retrieved 23 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "Field Listing :: Area". The World Factbook. CIA. Retrieved 1 November 2015.
Jump up ^ Hargreaves, Alan G., ed. (2005). Memory, Empire, and Postcolonialism: Legacies of French Colonialism. Lexington Books. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-7391-0821-5.
Jump up ^ R.R. Palmer and Joel Colton (1978). A History of the Modern World (5th ed.). p. 161.
^ Jump up to: a b "UNWTO Tourism Highlights" (2014 ed.). United Nations World Tourism Organization. Retrieved 11 September 2013.
Jump up ^ Alanna Petroff (22 November 2017). "Britain crashes out of world's top 5 economies". CNN Money.
^ Jump up to: a b "GDP, PPP (current international $)". The World Bank Group. Retrieved 1 November 2015.
Jump up ^ "Global Wealth Report" (PDF). Credit Suisse. October 2010. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 November 2014. Retrieved 27 October 2014. "In euro and USD terms, the total wealth of French households is very sizeable. Although it has just 1% of the world's adults, France ranks fourth among nations in aggregate household wealth – behind China and just ahead of Germany. Europe as a whole accounts for 35% of the individuals in the global top 1%, but France itself contributes a quarter of the European contingent.
Jump up ^ "World Health Organization Assesses the World's Health Systems". World Health Organization. 8 December 2010. Retrieved 16 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "World Population Prospects – The 2006 Revision" (PDF). UN. Retrieved 27 April 2010.
Jump up ^ Jack S. Levy, War in the Modern Great Power System, 1495–1975, (2014) p. 29
^ Jump up to: a b "Europa Official Site – France". EU. Retrieved 28 October 2014.
Jump up ^ "History of France". Discoverfrance.net. Archived from the original on 24 August 2011. Retrieved 17 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Perry, Walter Copland (1857). The Franks, from Their First Appearance in History to the Death of King Pepin. London: Longman, Brown, Green, Longmans, and Roberts.
Jump up ^ Examples: "frank". American Heritage Dictionary. "frank". Webster's Third New International Dictionary. And so on.
Jump up ^ Michel Rouche (1987). "The Early Middle Ages in the West". In Paul Veyne. A History of Private Life: From Pagan Rome to Byzantium. Belknap Press. p. 425. ISBN 0-674-39974-9. OCLC 59830199.
Jump up ^ Tarassuk, Leonid; Blair, Claude (1982). The Complete Encyclopedia of Arms and Weapons: the most comprehensive reference work ever published on arms and armor from prehistoric times to the present with over 1,250 illustrations. Simon & Schuster. p. 186. ISBN 0-671-42257-X. Retrieved 5 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Isidore of Seville, Etymologiarum sive originum, libri XVIII
^ Jump up to: a b c d Jean Carpentier (dir.), François Lebrun (dir.), Alain Tranoy, Élisabeth Carpentier et Jean-Marie Mayeur (préface de Jacques Le Goff), Histoire de France, Points Seuil, coll. " Histoire ", Paris, 2000 (1re éd. 1987), p. 17 ISBN 2-02-010879-8
Jump up ^ Carpentier et al. 2000, pp. 20–24
Jump up ^ The Cambridge ancient history. Cambridge University Press. 2000. p. 754. ISBN 978-0-521-08691-2. Retrieved 23 January 2011.
Jump up ^ Claude Orrieux (1999). A history of ancient Greece. John Wiley & Sons. p. 62. ISBN 978-0-631-20309-4. Retrieved 23 January 2011.
Jump up ^ Carpentier et al. 2000, p. 29
Jump up ^ "Provence in Stone". Life. 13 July 1953. p. 77. Retrieved 23 January 2011.
Jump up ^ Carpentier et al. 2000, pp. 44–45
^ Jump up to: a b Carpentier et al. 2000, pp. 53–55
Jump up ^ Carpentier et al. 2000, pp. 76–77
Jump up ^ Carpentier et al. 2000, pp. 79–82
Jump up ^ Carpentier et al. 2000, p. 81
Jump up ^ Carpentier et al. 2000, p. 84
Jump up ^ Carpentier et al. 2000, pp. 84–88
Jump up ^ "Faith of the Eldest Daughter – Can France retain her Catholic heritage?". Wf-f.org. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 17 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "France". Berkley Center for Religion, Peace, and World Affairs. Archived from the original on 6 February 2011. Retrieved 14 December 2011. See drop-down essay on "Religion and Politics until the French Revolution"
Jump up ^ "Treaty of Verdun". History.howstuffworks.com. 27 February 2008. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 17 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "History of France – The Capetian kings of France: AD 987–1328". Historyworld.net. Archived from the original on 6 August 2011. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b Jean-Benoit Nadeau; Julie Barlow (8 January 2008). The Story of French. St. Martin's Press. pp. 34–. ISBN 978-1-4299-3240-0.
Jump up ^ "Massacre of the Pure". Time. New York. 28 April 1961.
^ Jump up to: a b c Albert Guerard, France: A Modern History (University of Michigan Press: Ann Arbor, 1959) pp. 100, 101.
Jump up ^ "France VII". Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2009. Webcitation.org. Archived from the original on 31 October 2009.
Jump up ^ Don O'Reilly. "Hundred Years' War: Joan of Arc and the Siege of Orléans". TheHistoryNet.com.
Jump up ^ Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie (1987). "The French peasantry, 1450–1660". University of California Press. p. 32. ISBN 0-520-05523-3
Jump up ^ Peter Turchin (2003). "Historical dynamics: why states rise and fall". Princeton University Press. p. 179. ISBN 0-691-11669-5
Jump up ^ "Massacre of Saint Bartholomew's Day". Britannica.com. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Tilly, Charles (1985). "War making and state making as organized crime," in Bringing the State Back In, eds P.B. Evans, D. Rueschemeyer, & T. Skocpol. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985. p. 174.
^ Jump up to: a b "Language and Diplomacy". Nakedtranslations.com. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "BBC History: Louis XV (1710–1774)". BBC. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "Scholarly bibliography by Colin Jones (2002)" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 July 2011. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b c (in Dutch) Noah Shusterman – De Franse Revolutie (The French Revolution). Veen Media, Amsterdam, 2015. (Translation of: The French Revolution. Faith, Desire, and Politics. Routledge, London/New York, 2014.) Chapter 5 (p. 187–221) : The end of the monarchy and the September Murders (summer–fall 1792).
Jump up ^ Censer, Jack R. and Hunt, Lynn. Liberty, Equality, Fraternity: Exploring the French Revolution. University Park, Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2004.
Jump up ^ Doyle, William. The Oxford History of The French Revolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989. pp 191–192.
Jump up ^ Dr Linton, Marisa. "The Terror in the French Revolution" (PDF). Kingston University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Jacques Hussenet (dir.), " Détruisez la Vendée ! " Regards croisés sur les victimes et destructions de la guerre de Vendée, La Roche-sur-Yon, Centre vendéen de recherches historiques, 2007
Jump up ^ Frank W. Thackeray (1996). Events that Changed the World in the Nineteenth Century. p. 6. ISBN 9780313290763.
^ Jump up to: a b Blanning, Tim (April 1998). "Napoleon and German identity". History Today. 48. London.
Jump up ^ "France's oldest WWI veteran dies". London: BBC News. 20 January 2008.
Jump up ^ Spencer C. Tucker, Priscilla Mary Roberts (2005). "Encyclopedia Of World War I: A Political, Social, And Military History". ABC-CLIO. ISBN 1-85109-420-2
Jump up ^ "Vichy France and the Jews". Michael Robert Marrus, Robert O. Paxton (1995). Stanford University Press. p. 368.ISBN 0-8047-2499-7
Jump up ^ "The Danish Center for Holocaust and Genocide Studies". Archived from the original on 16 April 2014.
Jump up ^ "BBC, The Vichy Policy on Jewish Deportation".
Jump up ^ France, United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 6 December 2014. Retrieved 16 October 2014.
Jump up ^ Noir sur Blanc: Les premières photos du camp de concentration de Buchenwald après la libération, "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 November 2014. Retrieved 14 October 2014. (French)
Jump up ^ Kimmelman, Michael (4 March 2009). "In France, a War of Memories Over Memories of War". The New York Times.
Jump up ^ Crozier, Brian; Mansell, Gerard (July 1960). "France and Algeria". International Affairs. Blackwell Publishing. 36 (3): 310. doi:10.2307/2610008. JSTOR 2610008.
Jump up ^ "From Fourth to Fifth Republic". University of Sunderland. Archived from the original on 23 May 2008.
Jump up ^ "Declaration by the Franco-German Defense and Security Council". Elysee.fr. Archived from the original on 25 October 2005. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "France and NATO". La France à l'Otan. Archived from the original on 2014-05-09.
^ Jump up to: a b Marie-Christine Weidmann-Koop, Rosalie Vermette, "France at the dawn of the twenty-first century, trends and transformations", p. 160
Jump up ^ Yvonne Yazbeck Haddad and Michael J. Balz, "The October Riots in France: A Failed Immigration Policy or the Empire Strikes Back?" International Migration (2006) 44#2 pp. 23–34.
Jump up ^ Sylvia Zappi, "French Government Revives Assimilation Policy", in Migration Policy Institute "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 30 January 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2015.
Jump up ^ Hinnant, Lori; Adamson, Thomas (11 January 2015). "Officials: Paris Unity Rally Largest in French History". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 11 January 2015. Retrieved 11 January 2015.
Jump up ^ "Paris attacks: Millions rally for unity in France". BBC News. 12 January 2015. Retrieved 12 January 2015.
Jump up ^ "Parisians throw open doors in wake of attacks, but Muslims fear repercussions". The Guardian. 14 November 2015. Retrieved 19 November 2015.
Jump up ^ Syeed, Nafeesa (15 November 2015). "Yes, Parisians are traumatised, but the spirit of resistance still lingers". The Irish Independent. Retrieved 19 November 2015.
Jump up ^ "Europe's open-border policy may become latest victim of terrorism". The Irish Times. 19 November 2015. Retrieved 19 November 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e f g h i "Europe :: France". The World Factbook. CIA. 3 January 2018.
? Europe :: France 15 January 2010
Jump up ^ "Mont Blanc shrinks by 45 cm (17.72 in) in two years". Sydney Morning Herald. 6 November 2009. Retrieved 9 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "Protection of the Environment". Archived from the original on 25 April 2011.
Jump up ^ "Nuclear Power in France". World Nuclear Association. July 2011. Archived from the original on 19 July 2011. Retrieved 17 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Eia (10 September 2010) [First published: 23 April 2010]. "Energy profile of France". In Cutler J. Cleveland. Encyclopedia of Earth. Topic editor: Langdon D. Clough. Washington, D.C.: Environmental Information Coalition, National Council for Science and the Environment. Archived from the original on 2011-04-29. Retrieved 17 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Morgane Remy (18 June 2010). "CO2 : la France moins pollueuse grâce au nucléaire" [CO2: France less polluting thanks to nuclear]. L'Usine Nouvelle (in French). Archived from the original on 21 June 2010.
Jump up ^ "L'énergie nucléaire en France" [Nuclear energy in France]. La France en Chine (in French). 7 January 2008. Archived from the original on 1 July 2010.
Jump up ^ Ian Traynor and David Gow (21 February 2007). "EU promises 20% reduction in carbon emissions by 2020". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Marie Verdier (6 December 2009). "Les quatre enjeux de Copenhague". La Croix. Archived from the original on 11 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Kanter, James (1 July 2010). "Per-Capita Emissions Rising in China". The New York Times. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Reuters (10 September 2009). "France Sets Carbon Tax at 17 Euros a Ton". The New York Times. France. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "France set to impose carbon tax". BBC News. 10 September 2009. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Saltmarsh, Matthew (23 March 2010). "France Abandons Plan for Carbon Tax". The New York Times. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "Countries Compared by Environment > Forest area > % of land area". Nationmaster.com. International Statistics. Retrieved 7 January 2018.
Jump up ^ "Evolution of the French forest from 1984 to 1996". Inventaire Forestier National [National Forest Inventory]. Archived from the original on 13 May 2011.
Jump up ^ "La forêt en France et dans le monde" [The forest in France and in the world]. www.lepapier.fr (in French). Archived from the original on 27 July 2010.
Jump up ^ "Parks and other protected areas in France". Parks.it.
Jump up ^ "Fédération des parcs naturels régionaux de France" [Federation of Regional Natural Parks of France] (in French). Archived from the original on 12 July 2010.
Jump up ^ "La France veut créer une Zone Économique Exclusive en Méditérannée" [France wants to create an Exclusive Economic Zone in the Mediterranean]. Actu-Environnement.com (in French). 25 August 2009. Archived from the original on 13 May 2011.
Jump up ^ "The regional nature Parks of France" (PDF). Fédération des Parcs naturels régionaux de France [Federation of the regional nature Parks of France]. 22 July 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-07-22. Retrieved 22 June 2014.
Jump up ^ William M. Lafferty (2001). Sustainable communities in Europe. Earthscan. p. 181. ISBN 978-1-85383-791-3.
Jump up ^ "Regional Natural Parks". France Guide. Maison de la France. 2008. Archived from the original on 5 April 2012. Retrieved 27 October 2011.
Jump up ^ Hsu, A.; et al. (2016). "2016 Environmental Performance Index" (PDF). New Haven, CT: Yale University. Retrieved 14 December 2017.
Jump up ^ "La réforme territoriale" (in French). Government of France. 18 December 2015. Archived from the original on 30 December 2015. Retrieved 1 January 2016.
Jump up ^ "Departments of France" (in French). Myfrenchproperty.com. Archived from the original on 14 July 2011. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b "Circonscriptions administratives au 1er janvier 2015 : comparaisons régionales" [Administrative constituencies of 1 January 2015: regional comparisons] (in French). INSEE. Archived from the original on 30 April 2014. Retrieved 5 July 2015.
Jump up ^ "Currency and Exchange Rate". Thetahititraveler.com. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "2085rank". The World Factbook. CIA.
Jump up ^ "Constitutional Limits on Government: Country Studies - France". Democracy Web: Comparative studies in Freedom. Archived from the original on 28 August 2013. Retrieved 30 September 2013.
Jump up ^ Helen Drake (2011). Contemporary France. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 95. doi:10.1007/978-0-230-36688-6. ISBN 978-0-333-79243-8.
Jump up ^ "Le quinquennat : le référendum du 24 Septembre 2000" [The 5-year term: referendum of September 24, 2000] (in French). Archived from the original on 12 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "The National Assembly and the Senate – General Characteristics of the Parliament". Assemblée Nationale. Archived from the original on 2008-12-05.
Jump up ^ "Election of deputies". Assemblée Nationale. Archived from the original on 2011-07-04.
Jump up ^ "The senatorial elections". Sénate.
Jump up ^ "Le role du Sénat" [What is the purpose of the Senate?] (in French). 18 August 2007. Archived from the original on 18 June 2010.
Jump up ^ In European countries, legal doctrine has long faced the question of succession of criminal laws in time: Buonomo, Giampiero (2015). "La rivendicazione di Gallo". Mondoperaio edizione online.  – via Questia (subscription required)
Jump up ^ "François Hollande signs same-sex marriage into law". France 24. 18 May 2013. Retrieved 27 June 2013.
Jump up ^ "France: Strict Defamation and Privacy Laws Limit Free Expression – Index on Censorship | Index on Censorship." France: Strict Defamation and Privacy Laws Limit Free Expression – Index on Censorship | Index on Censorship. N.p., n.d. Web. 26 February 2014. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 22 September 2013. Retrieved 18 February 2014..
Jump up ^ (in French) La lutte contre le racisme et l'antisémintisme en France. AmbaFrance
Jump up ^ Kenneth Roth Executive Director (26 February 2004). "Human Rights Watch". Human Rights Watch. Retrieved 31 January 2009.
Jump up ^ "France votes to ban full-face veils". Amnesty International. 13 July 2010. Archived from the original on 7 December 2014.
Jump up ^ "L'image de l'islam en France" (PDF). ifop.fr (in French). IFOP. p. 22. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 March 2014. Retrieved 16 January 2017.
Jump up ^ "Membership of the Security Councils of the UN". 6 July 2010. Archived from the original on 6 July 2010.
Jump up ^ "The Soft Power 30" (PDF). Monocle. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 November 2015.
Jump up ^ "Members and Observers". World Trade Organization. Retrieved 30 October 2010.
Jump up ^ "History". Secretariate of the Pacific Community. 12 February 2010. Archived from the original on 28 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "Les pays membres de la COI" [IOC member countries]. Commission de l'Océan Indien | Indian Ocean Commission (in French). Archived from the original on 2 April 2012.
Jump up ^ "About the Association of Caribbean States". Association of Caribbean States. 24 July 1994. Archived from the original on 22 August 2012. Retrieved 22 June 2012.
Jump up ^ "84 États et gouvernements" [84 states and governments]. Organisation internationale de la Francophonie.
Jump up ^ "Embassies and consulates". France Diplomatie. The French Ministry of Foreign affairs. Archived from the original on 8 September 2010.
Jump up ^ Pierre-Louis Germain (12 November 2009). "L'alliance Franco-allemande au coeur de la puissance européenne" [The Franco-German alliance at the heart of European power] (in French). Institut Montaigne. Archived from the original on 23 January 2010.
Jump up ^ "De Gaulle says 'non' to Britain – again". BBC News. 27 November 1967. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Isabelle Lasserre (11 March 2009). "Quand Mitterrand, déjà, négociait le retour de la France dans l'Otan" [Mitterrand already negotiated the return of France to NATO]. Le Figaro (in French).
Jump up ^ "France ends four-decade Nato rift". BBC News. 12 March 2009. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Roger, Patrick (11 March 2009). "Le retour de la France dans l'OTAN suscite un malaise dans les rangs de la Droite" [The return of France to NATO causes discomfort in the ranks of the right]. Le Monde (in French). Paris.
Jump up ^ "Fifth French nuclear test sparks international outrage". CNN. 28 December 1995. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "China adds voice to Iraq war doubts". CNN. 23 January 2003. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "EU allies unite against Iraq war". BBC News. 22 January 2003. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Keith Porter (11 March 2004). "Foreign Policy Implications of the Iraq War". About.com:US Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 25 February 2010. Retrieved 9 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Sean Loughlin (12 March 2003). "House cafeterias change names for 'french' fries and 'french' toast". CNN. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ (in French) L'empire colonial français Archived 25 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "France involvement in peace-keeping operations". Delegfrance-onu-geneve.org. Archived from the original on 25 April 2011. Retrieved 9 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "Aid to developing countries rebounds in 2013 to reach an all-time high". OECD. Retrieved 3 March 2016.
^ Jump up to: a b France priorities Archived 22 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine. – France Diplomatie
Jump up ^ (in French) La fin du service militaire obligatoire Archived 8 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine. – La documentation française
Jump up ^ "Status of signature and ratification". CTBTO Preparatory Commission. 26 May 2010. Retrieved 27 May 2010.
Jump up ^ "The 15 countries with the highest military spending worldwide in 2012 (in billion U.S. dollars)". Sipri.org.
Jump up ^ (in French) Centre de Documentation et de Recherche sur la Paix et les Conflits, Etat des forces nucléaires françaises au 15 août 2004 Archived 25 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "90.07.06: The Aerospace Industry: Its History and How it Affects the U.S. Economy". Yale. Archived from the original on 20 September 2011. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "Aerospace industry of France". The Translation Company. Archived from the original on 18 February 2016. Retrieved 6 January 2016.
Jump up ^ Thierry Gadault (13 June 2002). "La France demeure un fournisseur d'armes de premier plan" [France stays one of the biggest arms supplier]]. L'express (in French). Archived from the original on 11 March 2012. En 2001, la France a vendu pour 1,288 milliard de dollars d'équipements militaires, ce qui la met au troisième rang mondial des exportateurs derrière les États-Unis et la Russie. [In 2001, France sold $1,288 billion of military equipment, ranking 3rd in the world for arms exportations behind the USA and Russia
Jump up ^ "Les ventes d'armes explosent en 2009" [Sales of weapons explode in 2009]. 20 minutes (in French). 8 February 2010. Retrieved 6 January 2017. La France est au 4ème rang mondial des exportateurs d'armes, derrière les Etats-Unis, le Royaume-Uni et la Russie, et devant Israël, selon un rapport du ministère de la Défense publié l'an dernier. [France is 4th biggest arms exportator, behind the USA, the UK and Russia, and ahead of Israel, according to a report of the Ministry of Defense published a year ago.]
Jump up ^ "Country Comparison :: Public Debt". The World Factbook. CIA. Retrieved 10 January 2018.
Jump up ^ John, Mark (26 October 2012). "Analysis: Low French borrowing costs risk negative reappraisal". Reuters. Retrieved 27 November 2012.
Jump up ^ "Fortune Global 500". Fortune. Retrieved 3 March 2015.
Jump up ^ "History of the Euro". BBC News. Retrieved 30 October 2010.
Jump up ^ "Entreprises selon le nombre de salariés et l'activité" [Companies by number of employees and activity] (in French). INSEE. July 2008. Archived from the original on 15 November 2009.
Jump up ^ "Entreprises publiques selon l'activité économique" [Public enterprises by economic activity] (in French). INSEE. March 2009. Archived from the original on 2 December 2009.
Jump up ^ "International Trade Statistics 2008" (PDF). WTO. 2009. p. 12. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 June 2011. Retrieved 5 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "Country Comparison :: Exports". The World Factbook. CIA. Retrieved 14 July 2017.
Jump up ^ "Country fact sheet: France" (PDF). World Investment Report 2009. UNCTAD. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2010. Retrieved 7 October 2010.
Jump up ^ "Country fact sheet: Japan" (PDF). World Investment Report 2009. UNCTAD. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2010. Retrieved 7 October 2010.
Jump up ^ Audrey Vautherot (19 November 2007). "La Bourse de Paris : une institution depuis 1724" [The Paris Stock Exchange: an institution since 1724]. Gralon (in French).
^ Jump up to: a b Embassy of France. "Embassy of France in Washington: Economy of France". Ambafrance-us.org. Archived from the original on 9 October 2011. Retrieved 16 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Andrews, Edmund L. (1 January 2002). "Germans Say Goodbye to the Mark, a Symbol of Strength and Unity". The New York Times. Retrieved 18 March 2011.
Jump up ^ Taylor Martin, Susan (28 December 1998). "On Jan. 1, out of many arises one Euro". St. Petersburg Times. p. National, 1.A.
Jump up ^ "The 10 Largest Banks in the World". Doughroller.net. 15 June 2010. Archived from the original on 12 July 2011. Retrieved 16 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "France – Agriculture". Nations Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 4 January 2011.
Jump up ^ "Key figures of the French economy". France Diplomatie. French Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs. Archived from the original on 14 January 2010. France is the world's fifth largest exporter of goods (mainly durables). The country ranks fourth in services and third in agriculture (especially in cereals and the agri-food sector). It is the leading producer and exporter of farm products in Europe.
^ Jump up to: a b "A Panorama of the agriculture and agri-food industries" (PDF). Ministère de l'Alimentation, de l'Agriculture et de la Pêche. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 September 2010.
Jump up ^ "Un ministère au service de votre alimentation" [A ministry serving your food] (in French). Ministère de l'Alimentation, de l'Agriculture et de la Pêche. 29 July 2010. Archived from the original on 6 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "Annex 1: Indicative Figures on the Distribution of Aid, by Size-Class of Aid, Received in the Context of Direct Aid Paid to the Producers According to Council Regulation (EC) No 1782/2003 (Financial Year 2007)" (PDF). European Commission. 22 April 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 7 October 2010.
Jump up ^ "Les enjeux des industries agroalimentaires françaises" [The stakes of the French agri-food industries] (in French). Panorama des Industries Agroalimentaires. Archived from the original on 29 December 2011.
Jump up ^ Phil Vinter (22 August 2012). "Eiffel Tower tops list of Europe's most expensive monuments with a price tag of £344 BILLION". Daily Mail. Retrieved 8 January 2018.
Jump up ^ Dilorenzo, Sarah (18 July 2013). "France learns to speak 'touriste'". AP. Archived from the original on 22 August 2013. Retrieved 20 July 2013.
Jump up ^ "Fréquentation des musées et des bâtiments historiques" [Frequentation of museums and historic buildings] (in French). 2003. Archived from the original on 24 December 2007.
Jump up ^ Judith Rubin, ed. (2009). "TEA/AECOM Attraction Attendance Report for 2009" (PDF). Themed Entertainment Association. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 June 2010. Retrieved 7 October 2010.
Jump up ^ "The French Riviera Tourist Board". CÔTE D’AZUR. Archived from the original on 25 April 2011. Retrieved 23 January 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b "Présentation de la Côte d'Azur" [Presentation of the French Riviera] (PDF) (in French). Côte d'Azur Economic Development Agency. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 July 2010.
Jump up ^ "Greenhouse Gas Emissions". Environmental Indicators. United Nations. July 2010. Retrieved 8 January 2017. ? CO2 emissions in 2006 Archived: 10 March 2010 ? CO2 emissions in 2007 Archived: 11 July 2017
Jump up ^ "Nuclear share figures, 2006-2016". World Nuclear Association. April 2017. Retrieved 8 January 2018.
Jump up ^ "France". IAEA | PRIS Power Reactor Information System. International Atomic Energy Agency. Retrieved 8 January 2018.
Jump up ^ "Chiffres clés du transport Édition 2010" (PDF) (in French). Ministère de l'Écologie, de l'Énergie, du Développement Durable et de la Mer. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 June 2010. Retrieved 7 October 2010.
Jump up ^ "Country comparison :: railways". The World Factbook. CIA.
Jump up ^ "TGV – The French High-speed Train Service". h2g2 The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy: Earth Edition. Archived from the original on 16 July 2012. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "Country comparison :: roadways". The World Factbook. CIA.
Jump up ^ (in French) L'automobile magazine, hors-série 2003/2004 page 294
Jump up ^ "Guide pratique de l' ADEME, la voiture". Ademe.fr. Archived from the original on 6 October 2008. Retrieved 22 October 2008.
Jump up ^ Bockman, Chris (4 November 2003). "France builds world's tallest bridge". BBC News. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "Strikes block French ports". The Journal of Commerce Online. 23 April 2008. Archived from the original on 2008-05-17 – via BDP International.
Jump up ^ "Marseille : un grand port maritime qui ne demande qu'à se montrer" [Marseille: a grand seaport just waiting to show]. La Provence (in French). 27 June 2009.
Jump up ^ Dave Emery (22 February 2010). "Marseille — A French Pearl in the Mediterranean Sea". HotelClub Blog. Archived from the original on 24 February 2010. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ William Godwin (1876). "Lives of the Necromancers". p. 232.
Jump up ^ André Thuilier, Histoire de l'université de Paris et de la Sorbonne, Paris, Nouvelle librairie de France, 1994
Jump up ^ Burke, Peter, A social history of knowledge: from Gutenberg to Diderot, Malden: Blackwell Publishers Inc., 2000, p.17
Jump up ^ Lanzetta M; Petruzzo P; Dubernard JM; et al. (July 2007). "Second report (1998–2006) of the International Registry of Hand and Composite Tissue Transplantation". Transpl Immunol. 18 (1): 1–6. doi:10.1016/j.trim.2007.03.002. PMID 17584595.
Jump up ^ Ghodoussi, Dr. "Media Collection". Interface Surgical Technologies, LLC. Retrieved 14 November 2011.
Jump up ^ Austin, Naomi (17 October 2006). "'My face transplant saved me'". BBC News. Retrieved 25 November 2007.
Jump up ^ "Woman has first face transplant". BBC NEWS. 30 November 2005.
Jump up ^ Pascal Boniface; Barthélémy Courmont (22 November 2006). Le monde nucléaire: Arme nucléaire et relations internationales depuis 1945. Armand Colin. pp. 120–. ISBN 978-2-200-35687-3.
Jump up ^ "Status of World Nuclear Forces". Federation Of American Scientists. Archived from the original on 18 June 2015.
Jump up ^ "Study France's Nuclear-Power Success". TheLedger.com. Archived from the original on 22 May 2015.
Jump up ^ "Stanford Journal of International Relations, "The French Connection: Comparing French and American Civilian Nuclear Energy Programs"" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 May 2015.
Jump up ^ "Countries Generating The Most Nuclear Energy – Business Insider". Business Insider. 6 March 2014.
Jump up ^ Muriel Gargaud; Ricardo Amils; Henderson James Cleaves (26 May 2011). Encyclopedia of Astrobiology. Springer Science & Business Media. pp. 322–. ISBN 978-3-642-11271-3.
Jump up ^ "France". oecd-ilibrary.org. Archived from the original on 4 October 2015.
Jump up ^ French Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Development. "France at the heart of the Rosetta space mission: a unique technological challenge". France Diplomatie. Archived from the original on 22 May 2015.
Jump up ^ "French set new rail speed record". BBC NEWS.
Jump up ^ "All Nobel Prizes". Nobel Media. Archived from the original on 3 November 2013. Retrieved 10 October 2012.
Jump up ^ "List of Fields Medallists". International Mathematical Union. Retrieved 10 October 2012.
Jump up ^ "Démographie - Population au début du mois - France (inclus Mayotte à partir de 2014)" [Demography – Population at the beginning of the month – France (including Mayotte since 2014)] (in French). Insee.
Jump up ^ "Bilan démographique 2006 : un excédent naturel record" (in French). Insee.
Jump up ^ "Bilan démographique 2016" (in French). Insee. Retrieved 19 January 2017.
Jump up ^ "Bilan démographique 2010" (in French). Insee. Retrieved 20 January 2011.
Jump up ^ "Tableau 44 – Taux de fécondité générale par âge de la mère" (in French). Insee. Archived from the original on 27 April 2011. Retrieved 20 January 2011.
Jump up ^ "Évolution générale de la situation démographique, France" (in French). Insee. Retrieved 20 January 2011.
Jump up ^ "Naissances selon le pays de naissance des parents 2010". Insee. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013.
Jump up ^ Jean-Louis Brunaux (2008). Seuil, ed. Nos ancêtres les Gaulois [Our ancestors the Gauls]. p. 261.
Jump up ^ Yazid Sabeg; Laurence Méhaignerie (January 2004). Les oubliés de l'égalité des chances [The forgotten of equal opportunities] (PDF) (in French). Institut Montaigne.
Jump up ^ "France's ethnic minorities: To count or not to count". The Economist. 26 March 2009. Retrieved 25 April 2013.
Jump up ^ "'Trajectories and Origins' Survey". Ined. 2008.
? Archived 2 December 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Oppenheimer, David B. (2008). "Why France needs to collect data on racial identity...in a French way". Hastings International and Comparative Law Review. 31 (2): 735–752. SSRN 1236362?Freely accessible.
^ Jump up to: a b Robin Cohen (2 November 1995). The Cambridge Survey of World Migration. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-44405-7.
Jump up ^ "France's crisis of national identity". The Independent. London. 25 November 2009.
Jump up ^ "Les personnes d'origine maghrébine y sont également au nombre de 5 à 6 millions; 3,5 millions ont la nationalité française (don't 500 000 harkis)", Évelyne Perrin, Identité Nationale, Amer Ministère, L'Harmattan, 2010, p. 112 ISBN 2-296-10839-3
Jump up ^ Falila Gbadamassi. "Les personnes originaires d'Afrique, des Dom-Tom et de la Turquie sont 5,5 millions dans l'Hexagone". Afrik.com. Archived from the original on 2 October 2013.
Jump up ^ Richburg, Keith B. (24 April 2005). "Europe's Minority Politicians in Short Supply". The Washington Post.
Jump up ^ Sachs, Susan (12 January 2007). "In officially colorblind France, blacks have a dream – and now a lobby". The Christian Science Monitor. Boston.
Jump up ^ "National strategy for Roma integration – European Commission – DG Justiceunknown label". Archived from the original on 6 March 2016.
Jump up ^ Astier, Henri (13 February 2014). "France's unwanted Roma". BBC.
Jump up ^ "Paris Riots in Perspective". New York: ABC News. 4 November 2005.
Jump up ^ James E. Hassell (1991). "III. French Government and the Refugees". Transactions of the American Philosophical Society. Volume 81, Part 7: Russian Refugees in France and the United States Between the World Wars. American Philosophical Society. p. 22. ISBN 0-87169-817-X.
Jump up ^ Markham, James M. (6 April 1988). "For Pieds-Noirs, the Anger Endures". New York Times.
Jump up ^ Raimondo Cagiano De Azevedo, ed. (1994). Migration and development co-operation. p. 25. ISBN 92-871-2611-9.
Jump up ^ "Flux d'immigration par continent d'origine" [Immigration flow by continent of origin]. Ined (in French).
? 3 Nov 2010: Archived 23 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Western Europe" (PDF). UNHCR Global Report 2005. UNHCR. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 June 2007. Retrieved 14 December 2006.
Jump up ^ Catherine Borrel; Bertrand Lhommeau (30 March 2010). "Être né en France d'un parent immigré" [To be born in France of an immigrant parent] (in French). Insee. Archived from the original on 3 February 2012.
Jump up ^ "Répartition des immigrés par pays de naissance" [Distribution of immigrants by country of birth] (in French). Insee. 2008. Archived from the original on 2011-10-26.
Jump up ^ Catherine Borrel (August 2006). "Enquêtes annuelles de recensement 2004 et 2005" [Annual census surveys 2004 and 2005] (in French). Insee. Archived from the original on 12 December 2006. Retrieved 14 December 2006.
Jump up ^ Swalec, Andrea (6 July 2010). "Turks and Moroccans top list of new EU citizens". Reuters. Archived from the original on 12 January 2012.
^ Jump up to: a b c "Qui sont les nouveaux immigrés qui vivent en France ?" [Who are the new immigrants living in France?]. SudOuest (in French). 2 December 2014.
Jump up ^ "Aires urbaines" [Urban areas]. PSS (in French). Archived from the original on 29 December 2015. Retrieved 10 January 2016.
Jump up ^ http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=urb_lpop1&lang=en
Jump up ^ (in French) La Constitution- La Constitution du 4 Octobre 1958 – Légifrance
^ Jump up to: a b Joffre Agnes ls the French obsession with "cultural exception" declining? Archived 17 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine.. France in London. 5 October 2008
Jump up ^ "Language and Diplomacy – Translation and Interpretation". Diplomacy.edu. Archived from the original on 19 July 2011. Retrieved 10 September 2010.
Jump up ^ "Why Is French Considered the Language of Diplomacy?". Legallanguage.com. Archived from the original on 30 December 2010. Retrieved 23 January 2011.
Jump up ^ Rapport Grégoire an II Archived 5 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "The International Education Site". Intstudy.com. Archived from the original on 27 February 2011. Retrieved 23 January 2011.
Jump up ^ "French: one of the world's main languages". About-france.com. Archived from the original on 16 May 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ (in French) Qu'est-ce que la Francophonie ? Archived 23 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine. – Organisation internationale de la Francophonie
Jump up ^ Jon Henley (22 April 2004). "France to train imams in 'French Islam'". The Guardian.
Jump up ^ "France – International Religious Freedom Report 2005". U.S. State Department. Retrieved 30 October 2010.
Jump up ^ "Observatoire du patrimoine religieux". 1 February 2012. Archived from the original on 26 November 2013. 94 % des édifices sont catholiques (dont 50 % églises paroissiales, 25 % chapelles, 25 % édifices appartenant au clergé régulier)
Jump up ^ "France". Berkley Center for Religion, Peace, and World Affairs. Archived from the original on 6 February 2011. Retrieved 14 December 2011.
Jump up ^ Joy of Sects, Sam Jordison, 2006, p. 166
Jump up ^ "Commission d'enquête sur les sectes". Assemblee-nationale.fr. Retrieved 30 October 2010.
Jump up ^ "Society2 ; religion in France ; beliefs ; secularism (laicité)". Understandfrance.org. Archived from the original on 16 September 2009. Retrieved 20 September 2009.[self-published source]
Jump up ^ How to conduct European clinical trials from the Paris Region ? Clinical Trials. Paris. February 2003
Jump up ^ "World Health Organization Assesses the World's Health Systems". Who.int. 8 December 2010. Retrieved 6 January 2012.
Jump up ^ The ranking, see spreadsheet details for a whole analysis photius.com
Jump up ^ "Measuring Overall Health System Performance for 191 Countries" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 August 2011. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "WHO country facts: France". Who.int. Archived from the original on 11 November 2013. Retrieved 11 November 2013.
Jump up ^ The World Health Report 2000: WHO
Jump up ^ "Espérance de vie, taux de mortalité et taux de mortalité infantile dans le monde" (in French). Insee.
Jump up ^ "Evolution de l'espérance de vie à divers âges" (in French). Insee.
Jump up ^ "Nombre de médecins pour 1000 habitants" (in French). Statistiques mondiales. Archived from the original on 5 March 2010.
Jump up ^ "Dépenses de santé par habitants" (in French). Statistiques mondiales. Archived from the original on 12 December 2009.
^ Jump up to: a b Even the French are fighting obesity – The NY Times
^ Jump up to: a b c Wahlgren, Eric (14 November 2009). "France's obesity crisis: All those croissants really do add up, after all". Dailyfinance.com. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Lambert, Victoria (8 March 2008). "The French children learning to fight obesity". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved 9 August 2010.
^ Jump up to: a b Why So Few French Are Fat Archived 25 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine. – Bloomberg Businessweek
Jump up ^ Mimi Spencer (7 November 2004). "Let them eat cake". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "The French Diet – Eat, Drink, and be Thin". Streetdirectory.com. Retrieved 9 August 2010.
^ Jump up to: a b France heading for US obesity levels says study – Food Navigator
Jump up ^ "New French food guidelines aimed at tackling obesity". Nutraingredients.com. 14 September 2006. Retrieved 9 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Petah Marian (23 May 2008). "France urged to get tough on child obesity". Just-food.com. Retrieved 9 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "Lycée". Britannica.com. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ (in French) 1881–1882 : Lois Ferry École publique gratuite, laïque et obligatoire. Assemblé Nationale
Jump up ^ (in French) II. L'évolution du contenu de l'obligation scolaire. Sénat.fr
Jump up ^ "Compare your country - PISA 2015".
Jump up ^ (in French) Les grandes écoles dans la tourmente – Le Figaro
Jump up ^ Ministère de la Culture et de la Communication, "Cultura statistics", Key figures
Jump up ^ "Official properties inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List in France". Whc.unesco.org. Retrieved 9 July 2015.
Jump up ^ "Guide to Impressionism". Nationalgallery.org.uk. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ (in French) RFI, Le néo-impressionnisme de Seurat à Paul Klee 15 March 2005
Jump up ^ National Gallery of Art (United States), The Fauves (dossier) Archived 5 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ (in French) RFI, Vlaminck, version fauve, 25 February 2008
Jump up ^ John Lichfield, The Moving of the Mona Lisa, The Independent, 2 April 2005. Retrieved 9 March 2012.
Jump up ^ Global Attraction Attendance Report, 2012 Archived 8 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Musée d'Orsay (official website), History of the museum – From station to museum
Jump up ^ "History of the painting collection". Musee-orsay.fr. 31 July 2007. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b (in French) Ministry of Tourism, Sites touristiques en France Archived 11 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine. page 2 "Palmarès des 30 premiers sites culturels (entrées comptabilisées)" [Ranking of 30 most visited cultural sites in France]
Jump up ^ "Toulouse's Saint Sernin, Largest Romanesque Church in Europe". Europeupclose.com. 22 February 1999. Archived from the original on 10 July 2011. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "Opus Francigenum". Answers.com. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "The Gothic Period". Justfrance.org. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ (in French) Histoire et Architecture – Site officiel de la Cathedrale de Notre-Dame de Reims
Jump up ^ (in French) Claude Lébedel – Les Splendeurs du Baroque en France: Histoire et splendeurs du baroque en France page 9: "Si en allant plus loin, on prononce les mots 'art baroque en France', on provoque alors le plus souvent une moue interrogative, parfois seulement étonnée, parfois franchement réprobatrice: Mais voyons, l'art baroque n'existe pas en France!"
Jump up ^ Hills, Helen (2003). Architecture and the Politics of Gender in Early Modern Europe. Ashgate Publishing. p. 86. ISBN 978-0-7546-0309-2.
Jump up ^ "Fortifications of Vauban". Whc.unesco.org. 8 July 2008. Retrieved 9 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "Official site of the UNESCO". Unesco.org. Retrieved 9 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Paris: City Guide. Lonely Planet. 2008. p. 48. ISBN 1-74059-850-4.
Jump up ^ Henri SECKEL (8 July 2008). "Urbanisme : Des gratte-ciel à Paris : qu'en pensez-vous ? – Posez vos questions". MYTF1News. Archived from the original on 29 October 2010.
Jump up ^ In the heart of the main European Business area Archived 29 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine. – NCI Business Center
Jump up ^ "Montaigne". Humanistictexts.org. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "La Princesse de Cleves by Madame de Lafayette, adapted by Jo Clifford". Radiodramareviews.com. 28 February 2010. Archived from the original on 10 August 2011. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Jean de La Fontaine, Fables (1668–1679), I., 21, Les Frelons et les Mouches à miel; reported in Thomas Benfield Harbottle and Philip Hugh Dalbiac, Dictionary of Quotations (French and Italian) (1904), p. 1.
Jump up ^ (in French) Auteurs et répertoires Archived 19 September 2010 at the Wayback Machine. – Official site of the Comédie Française
Jump up ^ "Author of some of the finest comedies in the history of the theater". Hartnoll, Phyllis (ed.). The Oxford Companion to the Theatre, 1983, Oxford University Press, p. 554
Jump up ^ Randall, Colin (25 October 2004). "France looks to the law to save the language of Molière". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ (in French) Le symbolisme français
Jump up ^ "Victor Hugo est le plus grand écrivain français" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 July 2013.
^ Jump up to: a b "Victor Hugo 1802–1885". Enotes.com. Retrieved 16 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "All-Time 100 Best Novels List". Adherents.com. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ (in French) La première Académie Goncourt Archived 25 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine. – Site officiel de l'Académie Goncourt Archived 19 November 2008 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "The Little Prince". Completelynovel.com. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b c Modiano strengthens France's literature Nobel dominance Archived 18 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine., Global Post, 9 October 2014
Jump up ^ "The Beginning of Modern Sciences". Friesian.com. Retrieved 16 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "100??????????? - No. 62" [The 100 Greatest Artists – No. 62]. ????HMV [Roachke HMV] (in Japanese). 21 April 2003.
Jump up ^ Girdlestone p. 14: "It is customary to couple him with Couperin as one couples Haydn with Mozart or Ravel with Debussy."
Jump up ^ Allen Schrott. "Claude Debussy – Biography – AllMusic". AllMusic.
Jump up ^ Huizenga, Tom (14 October 2005). "Debussy's 'La Mer' Marks 100th Birthday". NPR. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "Debussy's Musical Game of Deception". NPR. 12 July 2008. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "Biography of Claude Debussy". Classicfm.co.uk. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "Biography of Maurice Ravel". Classicfm.co.uk. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Boulez, Pierre. "Composer-Conductor Pierre Boulez At 85". NPR. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ RFI Musique, Biography of Noir Désir, March 2009: "Rock music doesn't come naturally to the French. A Latin country, with more affinity to poetry and melody, France has very rarely produced talented rock musicians. Rock music has other, more Anglo-Saxon ingredients"
^ Jump up to: a b c France Diplomatie, French music has the whole planet singing Archived 22 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine., June 2009
Jump up ^ (in French) "Bureau Export – Les certifications export 2012". IRMA. p.26. Retrieved 7 March 2015.
Jump up ^ The Telegraph, Daft Punk: Behind the robot masks, 17 November 2007: "Daft Punk were in many ways responsible for turning the spotlight on a new, cool underground of French music in the late 1990s, including bestselling acts such as Air, and have been a huge influence on the current generation of international star DJs"
Jump up ^ "The return of French pop music". BBC News. 20 December 2001. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Ministry of Culture of France, About "Fête de la Musique"
Jump up ^ France Diplomatie, June 2007_9392.html Fête de la Musique Archived 18 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine., 21 June 2007
Jump up ^ Dargis, Manohla. "Cannes International Film Festival". The New York Times.
Jump up ^ Lim, Dennis (15 May 2012). "They'll Always Have Cannes". The New York Times.
Jump up ^ Woolsey, Matt. "In Pictures: Chic Cannes Hideaways". Forbes.
Jump up ^ [1]
Jump up ^ UIS. "UIS Statistics". data.uis.unesco.org.
Jump up ^ Alan Riding (28 February 1995). "The Birthplace Celebrates Film's Big 1-0-0". The New York Times.
Jump up ^ "Cannes – a festival virgin's guide". Cannesguide.com. 15 February 2007. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "Cannes Film Festival | Palais des Festivals, Cannes, France". Whatsonwhen.com. Archived from the original on 10 June 2012.
^ Jump up to: a b (in French) Damien Rousselière Cinéma et diversité culturelle: le cinéma indépendant face à la mondialisation des industries culturelles. Horizons philosophiques Vol. 15 No. 2 2005
Jump up ^ "Enquête sur l'image du cinéma français dans le monde". unifrance.org. Archived from the original on 13 December 2014.
Jump up ^ Joëlle Farchy (1999) La Fin de l'exception culturelle ? CNRS ISBN 978-2-271-05633-7
Jump up ^ The cultural exception is not negotiable by Catherine Trautmann – Ministry of Culture
Jump up ^ (in French) La Convention UNESCO pour la diversité culturelle : vers un droit international culturel contraignant ? Archived 27 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine. – http://www.fnsac-cgt.com
Jump up ^ Kelly, 181. DeJean, chapters 2–4.
Jump up ^ "French perfume". About-France.com.
Jump up ^ "Le Figaro". Encyclopædia Britannica.
Jump up ^ (in French) OJD, "Observatoire de la Presse", Presse Quotidienne Nationale Archived 7 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ (in French) OJD, Presse Gratuite d'Information Archived 4 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine.. November 2011
Jump up ^ (in French) Observatoire de la Presse, Presse Quotidienne Régionale et Départementale Archived 7 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ (in French) OJD, "Bureau Presse Payante Grand Public", Presse Quotidienne Régionale et Départementale
Jump up ^ (in French) Observatoire de la Presse, Presse Magazine – Synthèse Archived 29 September 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ (in French) Observatoire de la Presse, Presse News Archived 29 September 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ The Telegraph, Nicolas Sarkozy: French media faces 'death' without reform 2 October 2008
Jump up ^ French government portal, Lancement des états généraux de la presse Archived 25 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine. 2 October 2008 [Launching of General State of written media]
Jump up ^ Angelique Chrisafis in Paris (23 January 2009). "Sarkozy pledges €600m to newspapers". London: The Guardian. Retrieved 21 June 2012.
Jump up ^ Radio France, "L'entreprise", Repères. Landmarks of Radio France company
^ Jump up to: a b (in French) Vie Publique, Chronologie de la politique de l'audiovisuel 20 August 2004 [Chronology of policy for audiovisual]
Jump up ^ "World warming to US under Obama, BBC poll suggests". BBC News. 19 April 2010. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "Global Views of United States Improve While Other Countries Decline" (PDF). BBC News. 18 April 2010. Retrieved 26 December 2011.
Jump up ^ "Germany on Top, U.S. Seventh in Nation Brands IndexSM". GfK Group. 24 September 2008. Archived from the original on 2010-08-25. Retrieved 9 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "Muslim-Western Tensions Persist" (PDF). Pew Research Center. 21 July 2011. Retrieved 17 November 2011.
Jump up ^ "Opinion of the United States (2011)". Pew Research Center. Retrieved 9 January 2018.
Jump up ^ "Opinion of the United States (2017)". Pew Research Center. Retrieved 9 January 2018.
^ Jump up to: a b Daniela Deane (11 February 2010). "Why France is best place to live in world". CNN. Retrieved 1 October 2013.
Jump up ^ "France". Flags of the World. 12 December 2013. Retrieved 9 January 2018.
Jump up ^ "The Symbols of the French Republic". Government of France. Archived from the original on 7 January 2014. Retrieved 16 January 2014.
Jump up ^ "Le coq" [The rooster]. Élysée — Présidence de la République (in French). Archived from the original on 1 April 2010.
Jump up ^ Amy B. Trubek (4 December 2000). Haute Cuisine: How the French Invented the Culinary Profession. University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 0-8122-1776-4.
Jump up ^ Priscilla Parkhurst Ferguson (1 August 2006). Accounting for Taste: The Triumph of French Cuisine. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-24327-6.
Jump up ^ Véronique MARTINACHE (30 November 2009). "La France du beurre et celle de l'huile d'olive maintiennent leurs positions" [France butter and olive oil maintain their positions]. Agence France Presse. Archived from the original on 2011-04-25.
Jump up ^ "Wines of France". Walter's Web. 17 May 2008. Archived from the original on 11 February 2010. Retrieved 9 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "French Cheese". Goodcooking. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "French Cheese". Archived from the original on 27 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Fairburn, Carolyn (29 February 1992). "Fading stars – Michelin Red Guide". The Times.
Jump up ^ Beale, Victoria; Boxell, James (16 July 2011). "Falling stars". The Financial Times.
Jump up ^ "Michelin 3 Star Restaurants around the world". Andy Hayler's 3 Star Restaurant Guide. Archived from the original on 24 July 2010. Retrieved 30 October 2010.
Jump up ^ Gilles Campion (25 November 2010). "Japan overtakes France with more Michelin-starred restaurants". Agence France-Presse.
Jump up ^ "French". Saveur. Retrieved 7 May 2016.
Jump up ^ "Union Cycliste Internationale".
Jump up ^ (in French) Les licences sportives en France – Insee
Jump up ^ "All you need to know about sport in France". Retrieved 11 February 2012.
Jump up ^ "History of the World Cup Final Draw" (PDF). Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ France wins right to host the 2007 rugby world cup. Associated Press. 11 April 2003
Jump up ^ "The Tour De France: The Most Famous Bicycle Race In The World". Weightlossdietinformation.com. 3 January 2010. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ "Cycling: Tour de France". Faqs.org. Retrieved 9 August 2010.
Jump up ^ (in French) Une course légendaire Archived 16 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine. – Site officiel du 24 heures du Mans
Jump up ^ Hill, Christopher R. (1996). Olympic Politics. Manchester University Press ND. p. 5. ISBN 0-7190-4451-0. Retrieved 5 July 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b c Olympic History – World Atlas of Travel
Jump up ^ "Paris 1900 Summer Olympics. Official Site of the Olympic Movement". Olympic.org.
Jump up ^ Lausanne, olympic capital – Tourism in Lausanne Archived 6 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Licenses of the French Football Federation" (PDF).
Jump up ^ "CNN/SI – World Cup". Sports Illustrated. 1 December 1998. Retrieved 22 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Stevenson, Jonathan (9 July 2006). "Zidane off as Italy win World Cup". BBC News. Retrieved 21 July 2011.
Jump up ^ 1984: Platini shines for flamboyant France. UEFA Archived 7 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ 2000: Trezeguet strikes gold for France. UEFA Archived 28 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Thierry Henry calls end to France career". BBC Sport. Retrieved 29 October 2014.
Jump up ^ Rugby. 123 Voyage
External links
	The Wikibook Wikijunior:Countries A-Z has a page on the topic of: France
Find more about
France
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity
"France". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
France at Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
France from the BBC News
France at UCB Libraries GovPubs
France at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
France Encyclopædia Britannica entry
France at the EU
 Wikimedia Atlas of France
 Geographic data related to France at OpenStreetMap
Key Development Forecasts for France from International Futures
Economy
INSEE
OECD France statistics
Government
France.fr (in English) Official French tourism website
(in French) Official Site of the Government
Official site of the French public service – Links to various administrations and institutions
Official site of the National Assembly
Culture
Contemporary French Civilization, journal, University of Illinois.
FranceGuide – Official website of the French Government Tourist Office
Photos
Photos of France
France photo gallery
[show] v t e
France topics
[show]
a small globe Geographic locale
[show]
International organisations
Flag of France.svgFrance portal Terra.pngGeography portal New-Map-Francophone World.PNGFrench language and French-speaking world portal Europe green light.pngEurope portal Flag of Europe.svgEuropean Union portal
Coordinates: 47°N 2°E

Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 264091107 LCCN: n79006404 GND: 4018145-5 SUDOC: 026378329 BNF: cb152383070 (data) HDS: 3354 NDL: 00563689
Categories: FranceCountries in EuropeFrench-speaking countries and territoriesG7 nationsG8 nationsG20 nationsLiberal democraciesMember states of NATOMember states of the Council of EuropeMember states of the European UnionMember states of the Organisation internationale de la FrancophonieMember states of the Union for the MediterraneanMember states of the United NationsRepublicsRomance countries and territoriesWestern European countries
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikinews
Wikiquote
Wikivoyage
Languages
Acèh
????????
????????
Afrikaans
Akan
Alemannisch
????
Ænglisc
??????
???????
Aragonés
?????
Armãneashti
Arpetan
???????
Asturianu
Avañe'?
????
Aymar aru
Az?rbaycanca
??????
Bamanankan
?????
Bahasa Banjar
Bân-lâm-gú
?????????
??????????
?????????? (???????????)?
???????
Bikol Central
Bislama
?????????
Boarisch
???????
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
??????
Català
???????
Cebuano
Ceština
Chamoru
Chavacano de Zamboanga
Chi-Chewa
ChiShona
ChiTumbuka
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Davvisámegiella
Deitsch
Deutsch
??????????
Diné bizaad
Dolnoserbski
?????
Eesti
????????
Emiliàn e rumagnòl
??????
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
E?egbe
?????
Fiji Hindi
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Fulfulde
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gagauz
Gàidhlig
Galego
??
Gikuyu
???????
????????????
?????? ?????? / Gõychi Konknni
???/Hak-kâ-ngî
??????
???
Hausa
Hawai?i
???????
??????
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Igbo
Ilokano
????????????? ???????
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
????
IsiZulu
Íslenska
Italiano
?????
Basa Jawa
Kalaallisut
?????
Kapampangan
????????-???????
???????
Kaszëbsczi
???????
Kernowek
Kinyarwanda
Kirundi
Kiswahili
????
Kongo
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî
????????
Ladino
?????
???
???? ??????
Latgalu
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuviu
Ligure
Limburgs
Lingála
Livvinkarjala
La .lojban.
Luganda
Lumbaart
Magyar
??????
??????????
Malagasy
??????
Malti
Maori
?????
?????????
????
????????
Bahasa Melayu
Baso Minangkabau
Mìng-de?ng-ng?¯
Mirandés
???????
????????????
??????
??????????
Nahuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
Nedersaksies
??????
????? ????
???
Napulitano
???????
Nordfriisk
Norfuk / Pitkern
Norsk
Norsk nynorsk
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
???? ?????
?????
Oromoo
O?zbekcha/???????
??????
????
Pälzisch
Pangasinan
??????
Papiamentu
????
Patois
????? ????
?????????
Picard
Piemontèis
Tok Pisin
Plattdüütsch
Polski
???t?a??
Português
Qaraqalpaqsha
Qirimtatarca
Reo tahiti
Ripoarisch
Româna
Romani
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
??????????
???????
???? ????
Gagana Samoa
?????????
Sängö
Sardu
Scots
Seeltersk
Sesotho
Sesotho sa Leboa
Setswana
Shqip
Sicilianu
?????
Simple English
????
SiSwati
Slovencina
Slovenšcina
?????????? / ??????????
Slunski
Soomaaliga
?????
Sranantongo
?????? / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / ??????????????
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
?????
Taqbaylit
Tarandíne
???????/tatarça
??????
Tetun
???
????
??????
???
Tsetsêhestâhese
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Twi
???? ???
??????
?? ????
??????????
????
???????? / Uyghurche
Vahcuengh
Vèneto
Vepsän kel’
Ti?ng Vi?t
Volapük
Võro
Walon
??
West-Vlams
Winaray
Wolof
??
Xitsonga
??????
Yorùbá
??
Zazaki
Zeêuws
Žemaiteška
??
??????
Kab?y?
Edit links
This page was last edited on 10 January 2018, at 12:07.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki



 Page semi-protected
Spain
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Spain (disambiguation).
"España" redirects here. For other uses, see España (disambiguation).
"Espanya" redirects here. For the Barcelona Metro station, see Plaça d'Espanya station.

An automated process has detected links on this page on the local or global blacklist. If the links are appropriate you may request whitelisting by following these instructions; otherwise consider removing or replacing them with more appropriate links. (To hide this tag, set the "invisible" field to "true")
List of blacklisted links:[show]
Coordinates: 40°N 4°W

Kingdom of Spain
Reino de España  (Spanish)
6 other offical names[a][b][show]
Flag of Spain
Flag
Coat of arms of Spain
Coat of arms
Motto: "Plus Ultra" (Latin)
"Further Beyond"
Anthem: "Marcha Real" (Spanish)[2]
"Royal March"
MENU0:00
Location of  Spain  (dark green)– in Europe  (green & dark grey)– in the European Union  (green)
Location of  Spain  (dark green)
– in Europe  (green & dark grey)
– in the European Union  (green)

Location of Spain
Capital
and largest city	Madrid
40°26'N 3°42'W
Official language
and national language	Spanish[c]
Co-official languages
in certain autonomous
communities	Catalan
Galician
Basque
Occitan
Ethnic groups (2015)	
89.9% Spanish
10.1% others
Religion (2017[4])	
68% Roman Catholic
27% Irreligious
2% other religion
Demonym	
Spanish Spaniard
Government	Unitary parliamentary constitutional monarchy
• Monarch
Felipe VI
• Prime Minister
Mariano Rajoy
• Deputy Prime Minister
Soraya Sáenz de Santamaría
• President of the Senate
Pío García-Escudero
• President of the Congress of Deputies
Ana Pastor Julián
• President of the Supreme Court
Carlos Lesmes Serrano
Legislature	Cortes Generales
• Upper house
Senate
• Lower house
Congress of Deputies
Formation
• Dynastic
20 January 1479
• De facto
23 January 1516
• De jure
9 June 1715
• First constitution
19 March 1812
• Current democracy
29 December 1978
• EEC accession[d]
1 January 1986
Area
• Total
505,990[5] km2 (195,360 sq mi) (51st)
• Water (%)
1.04
Population
• 2016 census
46,354,321 Increase[e] (30th)
• Density
92/km2 (238.3/sq mi) (112nd)
GDP (PPP)	2017 estimate
• Total
$1.769 trillion[7] (16th)
• Per capita
$38,171[7] (31st)
GDP (nominal)	2017 estimate
• Total
$1.307 trillion[7] (12nd)
• Per capita
$28,212[7] (30th)
Gini (2016)	34.5[8]
medium
HDI (2015)	Increase 0.884[9]
very high · 27th
Currency	Euro[f] (€) (EUR)
Time zone	CET (UTC+1)
WET (UTC)
• Summer (DST)
CEST (UTC+2)
WEST (UTC+1)
Note: Spain observes CET/CEST, except the Canary Islands which observe WET/WEST
Date format	dd/mm/yyyy (CE)
Drives on the	right
Calling code	+34
ISO 3166 code	ES
Internet TLD	.es[g]
Spain (Spanish: España [es'pa?a] (About this sound listen)), officially the Kingdom of Spain (Spanish: Reino de España),[a][b] is a country mostly located on the Iberian Peninsula in Europe, with there also being two large archipelagoes, the Balearic Islands in the Mediterranean Sea and the Canary Islands off the African Atlantic coast, two cities, Ceuta and Melilla, on the African mainland and several small islands in the Alboran Sea near the African coast. The country's mainland is bordered to the south and east by the Mediterranean Sea except for a small land boundary with Gibraltar; to the north and northeast by France, Andorra, and the Bay of Biscay; and to the west and northwest by Portugal and the Atlantic Ocean. It is the only European country to have a border with an African country (Morocco)[h] and its African territory accounts for nearly 5% of its population, mostly in the Canary Islands but also in Ceuta and Melilla.

With an area of 505,990 km2 (195,360 sq mi), Spain is the largest country in Southern Europe, the second largest country in Western Europe and the European Union, and the fourth largest country in the European continent. By population, Spain is the sixth largest in Europe and the fifth in the European Union. Spain's capital and largest city is Madrid; other major urban areas include Barcelona, Valencia, Seville, Bilbao and Málaga.

Modern humans first arrived in the Iberian Peninsula around 35,000 years ago. Iberian cultures along with ancient Phoenician, Greek and Carthaginian settlements developed on the peninsula until it came under Roman rule around 200 BCE, after which the region was named Hispania, based on the earlier Phoenician name Sp(a)n or Spania.[10] At the end of the Western Roman Empire the Germanic tribal confederations in migration from Central Europe invaded the Iberian peninsula and established themselves in relatively independent realms in its western provinces, including the Sueves, Alans and Vandals. Eventually, the Visigoths would integrate by force all remaining independent territories in the peninsula, including Byzantine provinces into the Kingdom of Toledo that more or less unified politically, ecclesiastically and legally all the former Roman provinces or successor kingdoms of what was then known in documents as Hispania.

The Visigothic kingdom fell to the Moors except in the north where shortly after started a process known as Reconquista.[11] Spain emerged as a unified country in the 15th century under the Catholic Monarchs, who completed the eight centuries-long Reconquista in 1492. In the early modern period, Spain became one of history's first global empires, leaving a vast cultural and linguistic legacy that includes over 500 million Hispanophones, making Spanish the world's second most spoken native language, after Mandarin Chinese and leading Counter-Reformation.

Spanish War of Independence against Napoleon rule was the beginning of the conformation of modern Spain as a nation-state. First liberal constitution was the Spanish Constitution of 1812.

Spain is a parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy,[12] with King Felipe VI as head of state. It is a major developed country[13] with the world's fourteenth largest economy by nominal GDP and sixteenth largest by purchasing power parity. It is a member of the United Nations (UN), the European Union (EU), the Eurozone, the Council of Europe (CoE), the Organization of Ibero-American States (OEI), the Union for the Mediterranean, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), OSCE, the Schengen Area, the World Trade Organization (WTO) and many other international organisations. Spain has a "permanent invitation" to the G20 summits that occur generally once a year.

Contents  [hide] 
1	Etymology
2	History
2.1	Prehistory and pre-Roman peoples
2.2	Roman Empire and the Gothic Kingdom
2.3	Middle Ages: Muslim era and Reconquista
2.4	Imperial Spain
2.5	Liberalism, Labour movement and nation state
2.6	Spanish Civil War, Francoism era
2.7	Restoration of democracy
3	Geography
3.1	Islands
3.2	Mountains and rivers
3.3	Climate
3.4	Fauna and flora
4	Politics
4.1	Government
4.2	Human rights
4.3	Administrative divisions
4.3.1	Autonomous communities
4.3.2	Provinces and municipalities
4.4	Foreign relations
4.5	Military
5	Economy
5.1	Agriculture
5.2	Tourism
5.3	Energy
5.4	Transport
5.5	Science and technology
5.6	Water supply and sanitation
6	Demographics
6.1	Urbanisation
6.2	Peoples
6.3	Minority groups
6.4	Immigration
6.5	Languages
6.6	Education
6.7	Health
6.8	Religion
7	Culture
7.1	World Heritage Sites
7.2	Literature
7.3	Art
7.4	Sculpture
7.5	Cinema
7.6	Architecture
7.7	Music and dance
7.8	Fashion
7.9	Cuisine
7.10	Sport
7.11	Public holidays and festivals
8	See also
9	Notes
10	References
11	Further reading
12	External links
Etymology
The origins of the Roman name Hispania, from which the modern name España was derived, are uncertain due to inadequate evidence, although it is documented that the Phoenicians and Carthaginians referred to the region as Spania, therefore the most widely accepted etymology is a Semitic-Phoenician one.[10][14] Down the centuries there have been a number of accounts and hypotheses:


Lady of Elche
The Renaissance scholar Antonio de Nebrija proposed that the word Hispania evolved from the Iberian word Hispalis, meaning "city of the western world".

Jesús Luis Cunchillos argues that the root of the term span is the Phoenician word spy, meaning "to forge metals". Therefore, i-spn-ya would mean "the land where metals are forged".[15] It may be a derivation of the Phoenician I-Shpania, meaning "island of rabbits", "land of rabbits" or "edge", a reference to Spain's location at the end of the Mediterranean; Roman coins struck in the region from the reign of Hadrian show a female figure with a rabbit at her feet,[16] and Strabo called it the "land of the rabbits".[17]

Hispania may derive from the poetic use of the term Hesperia, reflecting the Greek perception of Italy as a "western land" or "land of the setting sun" (Hesperia, ?spe??a in Greek) and Spain, being still further west, as Hesperia ultima.[18]

There is the claim that "Hispania" derives from the Basque word Ezpanna meaning "edge" or "border", another reference to the fact that the Iberian Peninsula constitutes the southwest corner of the European continent.[18]

Two 15th-century Spanish Jewish scholars, Don Isaac Abravanel and Solomon ibn Verga, gave an explanation now considered folkloric. Both men wrote in two different published works that the first Jews to reach Spain were brought by ship by Phiros who was confederate with the king of Babylon when he laid siege to Jerusalem. Phiros was a Grecian by birth, but who had been given a kingdom in Spain. Phiros became related by marriage to Espan, the nephew of king Heracles, who also ruled over a kingdom in Spain. Heracles later renounced his throne in preference for his native Greece, leaving his kingdom to his nephew, Espan, from whom the country of España (Spain) took its name. Based upon their testimonies, this eponym would have already been in use in Spain by c. 350 BCE.[19]

History
Main article: History of Spain

Reproduction of Altamira Cave paintings,[20] in Cantabria
Iberia enters written records as a land populated largely by the Iberians, Basques and Celts. Early on its coastal areas were settled by Phoenicians who founded Western Europe's most ancient cities Cadiz and Malaga. Phoenician influence expanded as much of the Peninsula was eventually incorporated into the Carthaginian Empire, becoming a major theater of the Punic Wars against the expanding Roman Empire. After an arduous conquest, the peninsula came fully under Roman Rule. During the early Middle Ages it came under Germanic rule but later, much of it was conquered by Moorish invaders from North Africa. In a process that took centuries, the small Christian kingdoms in the north gradually regained control of the peninsula. The last Moorish kingdom fell in the same year Columbus reached the Americas. A global empire began which saw Spain become the strongest kingdom in Europe, the leading world power for a century and a half, and the largest overseas empire for three centuries.

Continued wars and other problems eventually led to a diminished status. The Napoleonic invasions of Spain led to chaos, triggering independence movements that tore apart most of the empire and left the country politically unstable. Prior to the Second World War, Spain suffered a devastating civil war and came under the rule of an authoritarian government, which oversaw a period of stagnation that was followed by a surge in the growth of the economy. Eventually democracy was peacefully restored in the form of a parliamentary constitutional monarchy. Spain joined the European Union, experiencing a cultural renaissance and steady economic growth until the beginning of the 21st century, that started a new globalized world with economic and ecological challenges.

Prehistory and pre-Roman peoples
Main article: Prehistoric Iberia

Pre-Roman map of The Iberian Peninsula

Celtic castro in Galicia
Archaeological research at Atapuerca indicates the Iberian Peninsula was populated by hominids 1.2 million years ago.[21] In Atapuerca fossils have been found of the earliest known hominins in Europe, the Homo antecessor. Modern humans first arrived in Iberia, from the north on foot, about 35,000 years ago.[22][not in citation given] The best known artefacts of these prehistoric human settlements are the famous paintings in the Altamira cave of Cantabria in northern Iberia, which were created from 35,600 to 13,500 BCE by Cro-Magnon.[20][23] Archaeological and genetic evidence suggests that the Iberian Peninsula acted as one of several major refugia from which northern Europe was repopulated following the end of the last ice age.

The largest groups inhabiting the Iberian Peninsula before the Roman conquest were the Iberians and the Celts. The Iberians inhabited the Mediterranean side of the peninsula, from the northeast to the southeast. The Celts inhabited much of the inner and Atlantic sides of the peninsula, from the northwest to the southwest. Basques occupied the western area of the Pyrenees mountain range and adjacent areas, the Phoenician-influenced Tartessians culture flourished in the southwest and the Lusitanians and Vettones occupied areas in the central west. A number of cities were founded along the coast by Phoenicians, and trading outposts and colonies were established by Greeks in the East. Eventually, Phoenician-Carthaginians expanded inland towards the meseta, however due to the bellicose inland tribes the Carthaginians got settled in the coasts of the Iberian Peninsula.

Roman Empire and the Gothic Kingdom
Main articles: Hispania and Visigothic Kingdom

Roman Theatre, Mérida

Toledo, capital of the Visigothic Kingdom
During the Second Punic War, roughly between 210 and 205 BC the expanding Roman Republic captured Carthaginian trading colonies along the Mediterranean coast. Although it took the Romans nearly two centuries to complete the conquest of the Iberian Peninsula, they retained control of it for over six centuries. Roman rule was bound together by law, language, and the Roman road.[24]

The cultures of the Celtic and Iberian populations were gradually Romanised (Latinised) at different rates depending on what part of Hispania they lived in, with local leaders being admitted into the Roman aristocratic class.[i][25] Hispania served as a granary for the Roman market, and its harbors exported gold, wool, olive oil, and wine. Agricultural production increased with the introduction of irrigation projects, some of which remain in use. Emperors Hadrian, Trajan, Theodosius I, and the philosopher Seneca were born in Hispania.[j] Christianity was introduced into Hispania in the 1st century AD and it became popular in the cities in the 2nd century AD.[25] Most of Spain's present languages and religion, and the basis of its laws, originate from this period.[24]


Reccared I and bishops. Council III of Toledo, 589. Codex Vigilanus, fol. 145, Biblioteca del Escorial.
The weakening of the Western Roman Empire's jurisdiction in Hispania began in 409, when the Germanic Suebi and Vandals, together with the Sarmatian Alans entered the peninsula at the invitation of a Roman usurper. These tribes who had crossed the Rhine in early 407 and ravaged Gaul. The Suebi established a kingdom in what is today modern Galicia and northern Portugal whereas the Vandals established themselves in southern Spain by 420 before crossing over to North Africa in 429 and taking Carthage in 439. As the western empire disintegrated, the social and economic base became greatly simplified: but even in modified form, the successor regimes maintained many of the institutions and laws of the late empire, including Christianity and assimilation to the evolving Roman culture.

The Byzantines established an occidental province, Spania, in the south, with the intention of reviving Roman rule throughout Iberia. Eventually, however, Hispania was reunited under Visigothic rule.

The Spanish-Gothic scholars such as Braulio of Zaragoza and Isidore of Seville played an important role in keeping the classical Greek and Roman culture. Isidore was one of the most influential clerics and philosophers in the Middle Ages in Europe, and his theories were also vital to the conversion of the Visigothic Kingdom from an Arian domain to a Catholic one in the Councils of Toledo. This Gothic kingdom was the first independent Christian kingdom ruling in the Iberian Peninsula, and in the Reconquista it was the referent for the different kingdoms fighting against the Muslim rule. Isidore created the first western encyclopaedia which had a huge impact during the Middle Ages.[26]

Middle Ages: Muslim era and Reconquista
Main articles: Al-Andalus and Reconquista

The death of the Frankish leader Roland defeated by a Basque and Muslim-Muladi (Banu Qasi) alliance at the Battle of Roncevaux Pass (778) originated the Kingdom of Navarre led by Íñigo Arista.
In the 8th century, nearly all of the Iberian Peninsula was conquered (711–718) by largely Moorish Muslim armies from North Africa. These conquests were part of the expansion of the Umayyad Caliphate. Only a small area in the mountainous north-west of the peninsula managed to resist the initial invasion.

Under Islamic law, Christians and Jews were given the subordinate status of dhimmi. This status permitted Christians and Jews to practice their religions as People of the Book but they were required to pay a special tax and had legal and social rights inferior to those of Muslims.[27][28]


Catalan Romanesque Churches of the Vall de Boí
Conversion to Islam proceeded at an increasing pace. The muladíes (Muslims of ethnic Iberian origin) are believed to have comprised the majority of the population of Al-Andalus by the end of the 10th century.[29][30]

The Muslim community in the Iberian Peninsula was itself diverse and beset by social tensions. The Berber people of North Africa, who had provided the bulk of the invading armies, clashed with the Arab leadership from the Middle East.[k] Over time, large Moorish populations became established, especially in the Guadalquivir River valley, the coastal plain of Valencia, the Ebro River valley and (towards the end of this period) in the mountainous region of Granada.[30]


Hypostyle hall in the Great Mosque of Córdoba
Córdoba, the capital of the caliphate since Abd-ar-Rahman III, was the largest, richest and most sophisticated city in western Europe. Mediterranean trade and cultural exchange flourished. Muslims imported a rich intellectual tradition from the Middle East and North Africa. Some important philosophers at the time were Averroes, Ibn Arabi and Maimonides. The Romanised cultures of the Iberian Peninsula interacted with Muslim and Jewish cultures in complex ways, giving the region a distinctive culture.[30] Outside the cities, where the vast majority lived, the land ownership system from Roman times remained largely intact as Muslim leaders rarely dispossessed landowners and the introduction of new crops and techniques led to an expansion of agriculture introducing new produces which originally came from Asia or the former territories of the Roman Empire[31]


Petronilla of Aragon and Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Barcelona, dynastic union of the Crown of Aragon

Paint of Jueces de Castilla, Arco de Santa María, Burgos. In the County of Castile, kingdom after Fernán González, the law was based on fazañas, Custom (law).
In the 11th century, the Muslim holdings fractured into rival Taifa kingdoms, allowing the small Christian states the opportunity to greatly enlarge their territories.[30] The arrival from North Africa of the Islamic ruling sects of the Almoravids and the Almohads restored unity upon the Muslim holdings, with a stricter, less tolerant application of Islam, and saw a revival in Muslim fortunes. This re-united Islamic state experienced more than a century of successes that partially reversed Christian gains.


Basilica of San Isidoro, León
The Reconquista (Reconquest) was the centuries-long period in which Christian rule was re-established over the Iberian Peninsula. The Reconquista is viewed as beginning with the Battle of Covadonga won by Don Pelayo in 722 and was concurrent with the period of Muslim rule on the Iberian Peninsula. The Christian army's victory over Muslim forces led to the creation of the Christian Kingdom of Asturias along the northwestern coastal mountains. Shortly after, in 739, Muslim forces were driven from Galicia, which was to eventually host one of medieval Europe's holiest sites, Santiago de Compostela and was incorporated into the new Christian kingdom. The Kingdom of León was the strongest Christian kingdom for centuries. In 1188 the first modern parliamentary session in Europe was held in León (Cortes of León). The Kingdom of Castile, formed from Leonese territory, was its successor as strongest kingdom. The kings and the nobility fought for power and influence in this period. The example of the Roman emperors influenced the political objective of the Crown, while the nobles benefited from feudalism.

Muslim armies had also moved north of the Pyrenees but they were defeated by Frankish forces at the Battle of Poitiers, Frankia and pushed out of the very southernmost region of France along the seacoast by the 760s. Later, Frankish forces established Christian counties on the southern side of the Pyrenees. These areas were to grow into the kingdoms of Navarre and Aragon.[32] For several centuries, the fluctuating frontier between the Muslim and Christian controlled areas of Iberia was along the Ebro and Douro valleys.



Franciscan Ramon Llull and sufi Ibn Arabi, both mystic theologists
The County of Barcelona and the Kingdom of Aragon entered in a dynastic union and gained territory and power in the Mediterranean. In 1229 Majorca was conquered, so was Valencia in 1238.


The Almohads transferred the capital of Al-Andalus to Seville.
The break-up of Al-Andalus into the competing taifa kingdoms helped the long embattled Iberian Christian kingdoms gain the initiative. The capture of the strategically central city of Toledo in 1085 marked a significant shift in the balance of power in favour of the Christian kingdoms. Following a great Muslim resurgence in the 12th century, the great Moorish strongholds in the south fell to Christian Spain in the 13th century—Córdoba in 1236 and Seville in 1248. In the 13th and 14th centuries, the Marinid dynasty of Morocco invaded and established some enclaves on the southern coast but failed in their attempt to re-establish North African rule in Iberia and were soon driven out. After 800 years of Muslim presence in Spain, the last Nasrid sultanate of Granada, a tributary state would finally surrender in 1492 to the Catholic monarchs Queen Isabella I of Castile[33] and King Ferdinand II of Aragon.[34][35][36]


Alfonso X, pretender to the Holy Roman Empire crown and king of the Crown of Castile
From the mid 13th century, literature and philosophy started to flourish again in the Christian peninsular kingdoms, based on Roman and Gothic traditions. An important philosopher from this time is Ramon Llull. Abraham Cresques was a prominent Jewish cartographer. Roman law and its institutions were the model for the legislators. The king Alfonso X of Castile focused on strengthening this Roman and Gothic past, and also on linking the Iberian Christian kingdoms with the rest of medieval European Christendom. Alfonso worked for being elected emperor of the Holy Roman Empire and published the Siete Partidas code. The Toledo School of Translators is the name that commonly describes the group of scholars who worked together in the city of Toledo during the 12th and 13th centuries, to translate many of the philosophical and scientific works from Classical Arabic, Ancient Greek, and Ancient Hebrew. The Islamic transmission of the classics is the main Islamic contributions to Medieval Europe. The Castilian language—more commonly known (especially later in history and at present) as "Spanish" after becoming the national language and lingua franca of Spain—evolved from Vulgar Latin, as did other Romance languages of Spain like the Catalan, Asturian and Galician languages, as well as other Romance languages in Latin Europe. Basque, the only non-Romance language in Spain, continued evolving from Early Basque to Medieval. The Glosas Emilianenses founded in the monasteries of San Millán de la Cogolla contain the first written words in both Basque and Spanish, having the first become an influence in the formation of the second as an evolution of Latin.


Alhambra. Granada was the last Taifa in the Peninsula.
The 13th century also witnessed the Crown of Aragon, centred in Spain's north east, expand its reach across islands in the Mediterranean, to Sicily and even Athens.[37] Around this time the universities of Palencia (1212/1263) and Salamanca (1218/1254) were established. The Black Death of 1348 and 1349 devastated Spain.[38]

Imperial Spain
Main article: Spanish Empire


School of Salamanca (origin of modern international law theories) and Colegio de San Gregorio of Valladolid (origin of modern human rights theories).


Hernán Cortés and Francisco Pizarro.
In 1469, the crowns of the Christian kingdoms of Castile and Aragon were united by the marriage of Isabella I of Castile and Ferdinand II of Aragon. 1478 commenced the completion of the conquest of the Canary Islands and in 1492, the combined forces of Castile and Aragon captured the Emirate of Granada from its last ruler Muhammad XII, ending the last remnant of a 781-year presence of Islamic rule in Iberia. That same year, Spain's Jews were ordered to convert to Catholicism or face expulsion from Spanish territories during the Spanish Inquisition.[39] The Treaty of Granada guaranteed religious tolerance towards Muslims,[40] for a few years before Islam was outlawed in 1502 in the Kingdom of Castile and 1527 in the Kingdom of Aragon, leading to Spain's Muslim population becoming nominally Christian Moriscos. A few decades after the Morisco rebellion of Granada known as the War of the Alpujarras, a significant proportion of Spain's formerly-Muslim population was expelled, settling primarily in North Africa. [l][41]

The year 1492 also marked the arrival of Christopher Columbus in the New World, during a voyage funded by Isabella. Columbus's first voyage crossed the Atlantic and reached the Caribbean Islands, beginning the European exploration and conquest of the Americas, although Columbus remained convinced that he had reached the Orient. The colonisation of the Americas started, with conquistadores like Hernán Cortés and Francisco Pizarro. Miscegenation was the rule between the native and the Spanish cultures and people.


Christopher Columbus meets Isabella I of Castile and Ferdinand II of Aragon in the Alhambra
As Renaissance New Monarchs, Isabella and Ferdinand centralised royal power at the expense of local nobility, and the word España, whose root is the ancient name Hispania, began to be commonly used to designate the whole of the two kingdoms.[41] With their wide-ranging political, legal, religious and military reforms, Spain emerged as the first world power.

The unification of the crowns of Aragon and Castile by the marriage of their sovereigns laid the basis for modern Spain and the Spanish Empire, although each kingdom of Spain remained a separate country, in social, political, laws, currency and language.[42][43]


Anachronous map of the Spanish Empire, including territorial claims

María Pacheco, last leader of Revolt of the Comuneros, one of the first modern revolutions
There were two big revolts against the new Habsburg monarch and the more authoritarian and imperial-style crown: Revolt of the Comuneros in Castile and Revolt of the Brotherhoods in Majorca and Valencia. After years of combat, Comuneros Juan López de Padilla, Juan Bravo and Francisco Maldonado were executed and María Pacheco went into exile. Germana de Foix also finished with the revolt in the Mediterranean.



Philip II and Charles V, Habsburg Spain. Charles was also Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire.
Spain was Europe's leading power throughout the 16th century and most of the 17th century, a position reinforced by trade and wealth from colonial possessions and became the world's leading maritime power. It reached its apogee during the reigns of the first two Spanish Habsburgs—Charles I (1516–1556) and Philip II (1556–1598). This period saw the Italian Wars, the Revolt of the Comuneros, the Dutch Revolt, the Morisco Revolt, clashes with the Ottomans, the Anglo-Spanish War and wars with France.[44]

Through exploration and conquest or royal marriage alliances and inheritance, the Spanish Empire expanded to include vast areas in the Americas, islands in the Asia-Pacific area, areas of Italy, cities in Northern Africa, as well as parts of what are now France, Germany, Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands. The first circumnavigation of the world was carried out in 1519–1521. It was the first empire on which it was said that the sun never set. This was an Age of Discovery, with daring explorations by sea and by land, the opening-up of new trade routes across oceans, conquests and the beginnings of European colonialism. Spanish explorers brought back precious metals, spices, luxuries, and previously unknown plants, and played a leading part in transforming the European understanding of the globe.[45] The cultural efflorescence witnessed during this period is now referred to as the Spanish Golden Age. The expansion of the empire caused immense upheaval in the Americas as the collapse of societies and empires and new diseases from Europe devastated American indigenous populations. The rise of humanism, the Counter-Reformation and new geographical discoveries and conquests raised issues that were addressed by the intellectual movement now known as the School of Salamanca, which developed the first modern theories of what are now known as international law and human rights. Juan Luis Vives was another prominent humanist during this period.


Europe after the Peace of Westphalia
In the late 16th century and first half of the 17th century, Spain was confronted by unrelenting challenges from all sides. Barbary pirates, under the aegis of the rapidly growing Ottoman Empire, disrupted life in many coastal areas through their slave raids and the renewed threat of an Islamic invasion.[46] This was at a time when Spain was often at war with France.

The Protestant Reformation dragged the kingdom ever more deeply into the mire of religiously charged wars. The result was a country forced into ever expanding military efforts across Europe and in the Mediterranean.[47]

By the middle decades of a war- and plague-ridden 17th-century Europe, the Spanish Habsburgs had enmeshed the country in continent-wide religious-political conflicts. These conflicts drained it of resources and undermined the economy generally. Spain managed to hold on to most of the scattered Habsburg empire, and help the imperial forces of the Holy Roman Empire reverse a large part of the advances made by Protestant forces, but it was finally forced to recognise the separation of Portugal (with whom it had been united in a personal union of the crowns from 1580 to 1640) and the Netherlands, and eventually suffered some serious military reverses to France in the latter stages of the immensely destructive, Europe-wide Thirty Years' War.[48]


The Family of Philip V. During the Enlightenment in Spain a new royal family reigned, the House of Bourbon.
In the latter half of the 17th century, Spain went into a gradual decline, during which it surrendered several small territories to France and the Netherlands; however, it maintained and enlarged its vast overseas empire, which remained intact until the beginning of the 19th century.

The decline culminated in a controversy over succession to the throne which consumed the first years of the 18th century. The War of the Spanish Succession was a wide-ranging international conflict combined with a civil war, and was to cost the kingdom its European possessions and its position as one of the leading powers on the Continent.[49] During this war, a new dynasty originating in France, the Bourbons, was installed. Long united only by the Crown, a true Spanish state was established when the first Bourbon king, Philip V, united the crowns of Castile and Aragon into a single state, abolishing many of the old regional privileges and laws.[50]


The Esquilache Riots in Madrid, by Francisco de Goya, Enlightened absolutism peryod.
The 18th century saw a gradual recovery and an increase in prosperity through much of the empire. The new Bourbon monarchy drew on the French system of modernising the administration and the economy. Enlightenment ideas began to gain ground among some of the kingdom's elite and monarchy. Military assistance for the rebellious British colonies in the American War of Independence improved the kingdom's international standing.[51]

Liberalism, Labour movement and nation state
Main articles: Mid-19th-century Spain, Spanish American wars of independence, Spanish–American War, Anarchism in Spain, and Spanish Second Republic

The Third of May 1808 by Francisco de Goya depicts an episode of the Spanish Independence War.
In 1793, Spain went to war against the revolutionary new French Republic as a member of the first Coalition. The subsequent War of the Pyrenees polarised the country in a reaction against the gallicised elites and following defeat in the field, peace was made with France in 1795 at the Peace of Basel in which Spain lost control over two-thirds of the island of Hispaniola. The Prime Minister, Manuel Godoy, then ensured that Spain allied herself with France in the brief War of the Third Coalition which ended with the British victory at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805. In 1807, a secret treaty between Napoleon and the unpopular prime minister led to a new declaration of war against Britain and Portugal. Napoleon's troops entered the country to invade Portugal but instead occupied Spain's major fortresses. The ridiculed Spanish king abdicated in favour of Napoleon's brother, Joseph Bonaparte.

Joseph Bonaparte was seen as a puppet monarch and was regarded with scorn by the Spanish. The 2 May 1808 revolt was one of many nationalist uprisings across the country against the Bonapartist regime.[52] These revolts marked the beginning of a devastating war of independence against the Napoleonic regime.[53] Napoleon was forced to intervene personally, defeating several Spanish armies and forcing a British army to retreat. However, further military action by Spanish armies, guerrillas and Wellington's British-Portuguese forces, combined with Napoleon's disastrous invasion of Russia, led to the ousting of the French imperial armies from Spain in 1814, and the return of King Ferdinand VII.[54]


The Proclamation of the Spanish Constitution of 1812 in Cádiz
During the war, in 1810, a revolutionary body, the Cortes of Cádiz, was assembled to co-ordinate the effort against the Bonapartist regime and to prepare a constitution.[55] It met as one body, and its members represented the entire Spanish empire.[56] In 1812, a constitution for universal representation under a constitutional monarchy was declared, but after the fall of the Bonapartist regime, Ferdinand VII dismissed the Cortes Generales and was determined to rule as an absolute monarch. These events foreshadowed the conflict between conservatives and liberals in the 19th and early 20th centuries.


Laureano Figuerola, Manuel Ruiz Zorrilla, Práxedes Mateo Sagasta, Juan Prim, Francisco Serrano, Juan Bautista Topete, Adelardo López de Ayala, Juan Álvarez de Lorenzana, Antonio Romero Ortiz
Spain's conquest by France benefited Latin American anti-colonialists who resented the Imperial Spanish government's policies that favoured Spanish-born citizens (Peninsulars) over those born overseas (Criollos) and demanded retroversion of the sovereignty to the people. Starting in 1809 Spain's American colonies began a series of revolutions and declared independence, leading to the Spanish American wars of independence that ended Spanish control over its mainland colonies in the Americas. King Ferdinand VII's attempt to re-assert control proved futile as he faced opposition not only in the colonies but also in Spain and army revolts followed, led by liberal officers. By the end of 1826, the only American colonies Spain held were Cuba and Puerto Rico.

The Napoleonic War left Spain economically ruined, deeply divided and politically unstable. In the 1830s and 1840s Anti-liberal forces known as Carlists fought against liberals in the Carlist Wars. Liberal forces won, but the conflict between progressive and conservative liberals ended in a weak early constitutional period. After the Glorious Revolution of 1868 and the short-lived First Spanish Republic, a more stable monarchic period began characterised by the practice of turnismo (the rotation of government control between progressive and conservative liberals within the Spanish government).


Proclamation of the First Spanish Republic in Barcelona, 1873. Francesc Pi i Margall, was president and intellectual theoric of federalism.
In the late 19th century nationalist movements arose in the Philippines and Cuba. In 1895 and 1896 the Cuban War of Independence and the Philippine Revolution broke out and eventually the United States became involved. The Spanish–American War was fought in the spring of 1898 and resulted in Spain losing the last of its once vast colonial empire outside of North Africa. El Desastre (the Disaster), as the war became known in Spain, gave added impetus to the Generation of '98 who were conducting an analysis of the country.


Demonstration in Barcelona after the Tragic Week events
Although the period around the turn of the century was one of increasing prosperity, the 20th century brought little peace; Spain played a minor part in the scramble for Africa, with the colonisation of Western Sahara, Spanish Morocco and Equatorial Guinea. It remained neutral during World War I (see Spain in World War I). The heavy losses suffered during the Rif War in Morocco brought discredit to the government and undermined the monarchy.

A period of authoritarian rule under General Miguel Primo de Rivera (1923–1931) ended with the establishment of the Second Spanish Republic. The Republic offered political autonomy to the linguistically distinct regions of Basque Country, Catalonia and Galicia and gave voting rights to women. During this period Asturian miners' strike of 1934 occurred.

Spanish Civil War, Francoism era
Main articles: Spanish Civil War, Spanish Revolution of 1936, and Francoist Spain

They shall not pass!... Madrid will be the graveyard of fascism. Fascism was on rise in Europe during Spanish Civil War.
The Spanish Civil War broke out in 1936. For three years the Nationalist forces led by General Francisco Franco and supported by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy fought the Republican side, which was supported by the Soviet Union, Mexico and International Brigades but it was not supported by the Western powers due to the British-led policy of Non-Intervention. The civil war was viciously fought and there were many atrocities committed by all sides. The war claimed the lives of over 500,000 people and caused the flight of up to a half-million citizens from the country.[57][58] In 1939, General Franco emerged victorious and became a dictator.


Francisco Franco and Dwight D. Eisenhower (Madrid 1959) in the context of the Cold War. Spain entered in United Nations in 1955.
The state as established under Franco was nominally neutral in the Second World War, although sympathetic to the Axis. The only legal party under Franco's post civil war regime was the Falange Española Tradicionalista y de las JONS, formed in 1937; the party emphasised falangism, a form of fascism that emphasised anti-communism, nationalism and Roman Catholicism. Given Franco's opposition to competing political parties, the party was renamed the National Movement (Movimiento Nacional) in 1949.

After World War II Spain was politically and economically isolated, and was kept out of the United Nations. This changed in 1955, during the Cold War period, when it became strategically important for the US to establish a military presence on the Iberian Peninsula as a counter to any possible move by the Soviet Union into the Mediterranean basin. In the 1960s, Spain registered an unprecedented rate of economic growth which was propelled by industrialisation, a mass internal migration from rural areas to Madrid, Barcelona and the Basque Country and the creation of a mass tourism industry. Franco's rule was also characterised by authoritarianism, promotion of a unitary national identity, the favouring of a very conservative form of Roman Catholicism known as National Catholicism, and discriminatory language policies.

Restoration of democracy
Main articles: Spanish transition to democracy and Spanish society after the democratic transition

Federica Montseny speaks at the meeting of the CNT in Barcelona in 1977 after 36 years of exile.
In 1962, a group of politicians involved in the opposition to Franco's regime inside the country and in the exile met in the congress of the European Movement in Munich, where they made a resolution in favour of democracy.[59][60][61]

With Franco's death in November 1975, Juan Carlos succeeded to the position of King of Spain and head of state in accordance with the franquist law. With the approval of the new Spanish Constitution of 1978 and the restoration of democracy, the State devolved much authority to the regions and created an internal organisation based on autonomous communities. The Spanish 1977 Amnesty Law let people of Franco's regime continue inside institutions without consequences, even perpetrators of some crimes during transition to democracy like the Massacre of 3 March 1976 in Vitoria or 1977 Massacre of Atocha. The 'founding chairman' of the current leading political party in Spain, the People's Party, was Manuel Fraga who had been a minister in Franco's government and yet continued with his political career until shortly before his death in 2012.


Madrid Conference of 1991 about Israeli–Palestinian peace process with presidents George H. W. Bush and Felipe González, among others.
In the Basque Country, moderate Basque nationalism has coexisted with a radical nationalist movement led by the armed terrorist organisation ETA.[62] The group was formed in 1959 during Franco's rule but has continued to wage its violent campaign even after the restoration of democracy and the return of a large measure of regional autonomy.

On 23 February 1981, rebel elements among the security forces seized the Cortes in an attempt to impose a military-backed government. King Juan Carlos took personal command of the military and successfully ordered the coup plotters, via national television, to surrender.


José María Aznar, Jordi Pujol, Felipe VI and Adolfo Suárez in the 1990s
During the 1980s the democratic restoration made possible a growing open society. New cultural movements based on freedom appeared, like La Movida Madrileña and a culture of human rights arose with Gregorio Peces-Barba. On 30 May 1982 Spain joined NATO, following a referendum after a strong social opposition. That year the Spanish Socialist Workers Party (PSOE) came to power, the first left-wing government in 43 years. In 1986 Spain joined the European Economic Community, which later became the European Union. The PSOE was replaced in government by the Partido Popular (PP) in 1996 after scandals around participation of the government of Felipe González in the Dirty war against ETA; at that point the PSOE had served almost 14 consecutive years in office.

On 1 January 2002, Spain fully adopted the euro, and Spain experienced strong economic growth, well above the EU average during the early 2000s. However, well-publicised concerns issued by many economic commentators at the height of the boom warned that extraordinary property prices and a high foreign trade deficit were likely to lead to a painful economic collapse.[63]


Spain has been a member of the European Union since 1986.
In 2002 the Prestige oil spill occurred with big ecological consequences along Spain's Atlantic coastline. In 2003 José María Aznar supported US president George W. Bush in the Iraq War, and a strong movement against war rose in Spanish society. On 11 March 2004 a local Islamist terrorist group inspired by Al-Qaeda carried out the largest terrorist attack in Spanish history when they killed 191 people and wounded more than 1,800 others by bombing commuter trains in Madrid.[64] Though initial suspicions focused on the Basque terrorist group ETA, evidence soon emerged indicating Islamist involvement. Because of the proximity of the 2004 election, the issue of responsibility quickly became a political controversy, with the main competing parties PP and PSOE exchanging accusations over the handling of the incident.[65] The elections on 14 March were won by the PSOE, led by José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero.


Puerta del Sol square in Madrid, shown here on 20 May 2011, became a focal point and a symbol during the protests.
The proportion of Spain's foreign born population increased rapidly during its economic boom in the early 2000s, but then declined due to the financial crisis.[66] In 2005 the Spanish government legalised same sex marriage. Decentralisation was supported with much resistance of Constitutional Court and conservative opposition, so did gender politics like quotas or the law against gender violence. Government talks with ETA happened, and the group announced its permanent cease of violence in 2010.

The bursting of the Spanish property bubble in 2008 led to the 2008–16 Spanish financial crisis and high levels of unemployment, cuts in government spending and corruption in Royal family and People's Party served as a backdrop to the 2011–12 Spanish protests. Catalan independentism was also on rise. In 2011, Mariano Rajoy's conservative People's Party won the election with 44.6% of votes, and Rajoy became the Spanish Prime Minister, after having been the leader of the opposition from 2004 to 2011, and continued to implement austerity measures required by the EU Stability and Growth Pact. On 19 June 2014, the monarch, Juan Carlos, abdicated in favour of his son, who became Felipe VI.

A Catalan independence referendum was held on 1 October 2017 and then, on 27 October, the Catalan parliament voted to unilaterally declare independence from Spain to form a Catalan Republic[67][68] on the day the Spanish Senate was discussing approving direct rule over Catalonia as called for by the Spanish Prime Minister.[69][70] Later that day the Senate granted the power to impose direct rule and Mr Rajoy dissolved the Catalan parliament and called a new election.[71] No country recognised Catalonia as a separate state.[72]

Geography
Main article: Geography of Spain

Topographic map of Spain
At 505,992 km2 (195,365 sq mi), Spain is the world's fifty-second largest country and Europe's fourth largest country. It is some 47,000 km2 (18,000 sq mi) smaller than France and 81,000 km2 (31,000 sq mi) larger than the US state of California. Mount Teide (Tenerife) is the highest mountain peak in Spain and is the third largest volcano in the world from its base. Spain is a transcontinental country.

Spain lies between latitudes 26° and 44° N, and longitudes 19° W and 5° E.

On the west, Spain is bordered by Portugal; on the south, it is bordered by Gibraltar (a British overseas territory) and Morocco, through its exclaves in North Africa (Ceuta and Melilla, and the peninsula of Vélez de la Gomera). On the northeast, along the Pyrenees mountain range, it is bordered by France and the Principality of Andorra. Along the Pyrenees in Girona, a small exclave town called Llívia is surrounded by France.

Extending to 1,214 km (754 mi), the Portugal–Spain border is the longest uninterrupted border within the European Union.[73]

Islands
Main article: List of islands of Spain
Spain also includes the Balearic Islands in the Mediterranean Sea, the Canary Islands in the Atlantic Ocean and a number of uninhabited islands on the Mediterranean side of the Strait of Gibraltar, known as plazas de soberanía ("places of sovereignty", or territories under Spanish sovereignty), such as the Chafarinas Islands and Alhucemas. The peninsula of Vélez de la Gomera is also regarded as a plaza de soberanía. The isle of Alborán, located in the Mediterranean between Spain and North Africa, is also administered by Spain, specifically by the municipality of Almería, Andalusia. The little Pheasant Island in the River Bidasoa is a Spanish-French condominium.

Largest inhabited islands of Spain:


Mt Teide, Tenerife, Canary Islands
Island	Population
Tenerife	899,833
Majorca (Mallorca)	862,397
Gran Canaria	838,397
Lanzarote	141,938
Ibiza	125,053
Fuerteventura	103,107
Menorca	92,434
La Palma	85,933
Mountains and rivers

Ordesa y Monte Perdido National Park, World Heritage Site in the Pyrenees
Mainland Spain is a mountainous country, dominated by high plateaus and mountain chains. After the Pyrenees, the main mountain ranges are the Cordillera Cantábrica (Cantabrian Range), Sistema Ibérico (Iberian System), Sistema Central (Central System), Montes de Toledo, Sierra Morena and the Sistema Bético (Baetic System) whose highest peak, the 3,478-metre-high (11,411-foot) Mulhacén, located in Sierra Nevada, is the highest elevation in the Iberian Peninsula. The highest point in Spain is the Teide, a 3,718-metre (12,198 ft) active volcano in the Canary Islands. The Meseta Central (often translated as "Inner Plateau") is a vast plateau in the heart of peninsular Spain.

There are several major rivers in Spain such as the Tagus (Tajo), Ebro, Guadiana, Douro (Duero), Guadalquivir, Júcar, Segura, Turia and Minho (Miño). Alluvial plains are found along the coast, the largest of which is that of the Guadalquivir in Andalusia.

Climate
Main article: Climate of Spain

Somiedo Natural Park, Cantabrian Mountains, Asturias.

The Mediterranean coast in Cartagena, Region of Murcia

Tablas de Daimiel National Park.
Three main climatic zones can be separated, according to geographical situation and orographic conditions:[74][75][76]

The Mediterranean climate, characterised by warm/hot and dry summers, is dominant in the peninsula. It has two varieties: Csa and Csb according to the Köppen climate classification.
The Csa zone is associated to areas with hot summers. It is predominant in the Mediterranean and Southern Atlantic coast and inland throughout Andalusia, Extremadura and much, if not most, of the centre of the country. The Csa zone covers climatic zones with both relatively warm and cold winters which are considered extremely different to each other at a local level, reason for which Köppen classification is often eschewed within Spain. Local climatic maps generally divide the Mediterranean zone (which covers most of the country) between warm-winter and cold-winter zones, rather than according to summer temperatures.
The Csb zone has warm rather than hot summers, and extends to additional cool-winter areas not typically associated with a Mediterranean climate, such as much of central and northern-central of Spain (e.g. western Castile–León, northeastern Castilla-La Mancha and northern Madrid) and into much rainier areas (notably Galicia). Note areas with relatively high rainfall such as Galicia are not considered Mediterranean under local classifications, but classed as oceanic.
The semi-arid climate (BSk, BSh), is predominant in the southeastern quarter of the country, but is also widespread in other areas of Spain. It covers most of the Region of Murcia, southern Valencia and eastern Andalusia, where true hot desert climates also exist. Further to the north, it is predominant in the upper and mid reaches of the Ebro valley, which crosses southern Navarre, central Aragon and western Catalonia. It also is found in Madrid, Extremadura, Castilla-La Mancha, and some locations of western Andalusia. The dry season extends beyond the summer and average temperature depends on altitude and latitude.
The oceanic climate (Cfb), located in the northern quarter of the country, especially in the Atlantic region (Basque Country, Cantabria, Asturias, and partly Galicia and Castile–León). Additionally it is also found in northern Navarre, in most highlands areas along the Iberian System and in the Pyrenean valleys, where a humid subtropical variant (Cfa) also occurs. Winter and summer temperatures are influenced by the ocean, and have no seasonal drought.
Apart from these main types, other sub-types can be found, like the alpine and continental climates (Dfc, Dfb / Dsc, Dsb) in the Pyrenees as well as parts of the Cantabrian Range, the Central System, Sierra Nevada and the Iberian System, and a typical desert climate (BWk, BWh) in the zone of Almería, Murcia and eastern Canary Islands. Low-lying areas of the Canary Islands average above 18.0 °C (64.4 °F) during their coldest month, thus having a tropical climate.

Fauna and flora

Iberian Wolf
The fauna presents a wide diversity that is due in large part to the geographical position of the Iberian peninsula between the Atlantic and the Mediterranean and between Africa and Eurasia, and the great diversity of habitats and biotopes, the result of a considerable variety of climates and well differentiated regions.

The vegetation of Spain is varied due to several factors including the diversity of the relief, the climate and latitude. Spain includes different phytogeographic regions, each with its own floristic characteristics resulting largely from the interaction of climate, topography, soil type and fire, biotic factors.

Politics
Main article: Politics of Spain
See also: Spanish Constitution of 1978

The Royal Palace in Madrid
According to the Democracy Index of the EIU, Spain is one of the 19 full democracies in the world.

The Spanish Constitution of 1978 is the culmination of the Spanish transition to democracy. The constitutional history of Spain dates back to the constitution of 1812. Impatient with the slow pace of democratic political reforms in 1976 and 1977, Spain's new King Juan Carlos, known for his formidable personality, dismissed Carlos Arias Navarro and appointed the reformer Adolfo Suárez as Prime Minister.[77][78] The resulting general election in 1977 convened the Constituent Cortes (the Spanish Parliament, in its capacity as a constitutional assembly) for the purpose of drafting and approving the constitution of 1978.[79] After a national referendum on 6 December 1978, 88% of voters approved of the new constitution.

As a result, Spain is now composed of 17 autonomous communities and two autonomous cities with varying degrees of autonomy thanks to its Constitution, which nevertheless explicitly states the indivisible unity of the Spanish nation. The constitution also specifies that Spain has no state religion and that all are free to practice and believe as they wish.

The Spanish administration approved legislation in 2007 aimed at furthering equality between genders in Spanish political and economic life (Gender Equality Act).[80][81] However, in the legislative branch, as of May 2017 only 140 of the 350 members of the Congress were women (40%).[82] It places Spain 12th on a list of countries ranked by proportion of women in the lower house. In the Senate, there are only 101 women out of 263 (38.0%).[83] The Gender Empowerment Measure of Spain in the United Nations Human Development Report is 0.794, 12th in the world.[84]

Government
Main article: Government of Spain
See also: List of Spanish monarchs and Monarchs of Spain family tree

Congress of Deputies, Madrid
Spain is a constitutional monarchy, with a hereditary monarch and a bicameral parliament, the Cortes Generales (General Courts). The executive branch consists of a Council of Ministers of Spain presided over by the Prime Minister, nominated and appointed by the monarch and confirmed by the Congress of Deputies following legislative elections. By political custom established by King Juan Carlos since the ratification of the 1978 Constitution, the king's nominees have all been from parties who maintain a plurality of seats in the Congress.

The legislative branch is made up of the Congress of Deputies (Congreso de los Diputados) with 350 members, elected by popular vote on block lists by proportional representation to serve four-year terms, and a Senate (Senado) with 259 seats of which 208 are directly elected by popular vote, using a limited voting method, and the other 51 appointed by the regional legislatures to also serve four-year terms.

Head of State
King Felipe VI, since 19 June 2014
Head of Government
Prime Minister of Spain (Presidente del Gobierno, literally President of the Government): Mariano Rajoy Brey, elected 20 November 2011.
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for the Presidency: Soraya Sáenz de Santamaría.
Cabinet
Council of Ministers (Consejo de Ministros) designated by the Prime Minister.
Spain is organisationally structured as a so-called Estado de las Autonomías ("State of Autonomies"); it is one of the most decentralised countries in Europe, along with Switzerland, Germany and Belgium;[85] for example, all autonomous communities have their own elected parliaments, governments, public administrations, budgets, and resources. Health and education systems among others are managed by the Spanish communities, and in addition, the Basque Country and Navarre also manage their own public finances based on foral provisions. In Catalonia, the Basque Country, Navarre and the Canary Islands, a full-fledged autonomous police corps replaces some of the State police functions (see Mossos d'Esquadra, Ertzaintza, Policía Foral/Foruzaingoa and Policía Canaria).

Human rights
Main article: Human rights in Spain
See also: LGBT rights in Spain

Europride in Madrid. In 2017 a Summit about LGBTI human rights took part at the same time than the World Pride.[86]
The Spanish Constitution of 1978 "protect all Spaniards and all the peoples of Spain in the exercise of human rights, their cultures and traditions, languages and institutions".[87]

According to Amnesty International (AI), government investigations of alleged police abuses are often lengthy and punishments were light.[88] Violence against women was a problem, which the Government took steps to address.[89][90]

Spain provides one of the highest degrees of liberty in the world for its LGBT community. Among the countries studied by Pew Research Center in 2013, Spain is rated first in acceptance of homosexuality, with an 88% of society supporting the gay community compared to 11% who do not.[91]

Administrative divisions
Main article: Political divisions of Spain
The Spanish State is integrated by 17 autonomous communities and 2 autonomous cities, both groups being the highest or first-order administrative division in the country. Autonomous communities are integrated by provinces, of which there are 50 in total, and in turn, provinces are integrated by municipalities. In Catalonia, two additional divisions exist, the comarques (sing. comarca) and the vegueries (sing. vegueria) both of which have administrative powers; comarques being aggregations of municipalities, and the vegueries being aggregations of comarques. The concept of a comarca exists in all autonomous communities, however, unlike Catalonia, these are merely historical or geographical subdivisions.

Autonomous communities
Main article: Autonomous communities of Spain
See also: Nationalities and regions of Spain
GaliciaNavarreMadridLa RiojaAragonCataloniaValenciaCastilla-
La ManchaExtremaduraPortugalCastile
and LeónAsturiasCantabriaBasque CountryMurciaAndalusiaCeutaMelillaFranceBalearic
IslandsCanary
IslandsMediterranean SeaBay of BiscayAtlantic
OceanAndorraAtlantic
OceanFlag of the Balearic Islands.svgFlag of Andalucía.svgFlag of Castile and León.svgFlag of the Valencian Community (2x3).svgBandera Castilla-La Mancha.svgFlag of Aragon.svgFlag of the Community of Madrid.svgFlag of La Rioja (with coat of arms).svgFlag Melilla.svgGibraltar (UK)Flag Ceuta.svgFlag of Catalonia.svgFlag of Cantabria.svgFlag of the Basque Country.svgFlag of Galicia.svgFlag of Extremadura (with coat of arms).svgBandera de Navarra.svgFlag of Asturias.svgFlag of the Canary Islands.svgFlag of the Region of Murcia.svg
Spain's autonomous communities are the first level administrative divisions of the country. They were created after the current constitution came into effect (in 1978) in recognition of the right to self-government of the "nationalities and regions of Spain".[92] The autonomous communities were to be integrated into adjacent provinces with common historical, cultural, and economical traits. This territorial organisation, based on devolution, is literally known in Spain as the "State of Autonomies".

The basic institutional law of each autonomous community is the Statute of Autonomy. The Statutes of Autonomy establish the name of the community according to its historical and contemporary identity, the limits of its territories, the name and organisation of the institutions of government and the rights they enjoy according to the constitution.[93]

The governments of all autonomous communities must be based on a division of powers comprising:

a legislative assembly whose members must be elected by universal suffrage according to the system of proportional representation and in which all areas that integrate the territory are fairly represented;
a government council, with executive and administrative functions headed by a president, elected by the Legislative Assembly and nominated by the King of Spain;
a supreme court, under the supreme court of Spain, which heads the judiciary in the autonomous community.
Catalonia, Galicia and the Basque Country, which identified themselves as nationalities, were granted self-government through a rapid process. Andalusia also took that denomination in its first Statute of Autonomy, even though it followed the longer process stipulated in the constitution for the rest of the country. Progressively, other communities in revisions to their Statutes of Autonomy have also taken that denomination in accordance to their historical and modern identities, such as the Valencian Community,[94] the Canary Islands,[95] the Balearic Islands,[96] and Aragon.[97]

The autonomous communities have wide legislative and executive autonomy, with their own parliaments and regional governments. The distribution of powers may be different for every community, as laid out in their Statutes of Autonomy, since devolution was intended to be asymmetrical. Only two communities—the Basque Country and Navarre—have full fiscal autonomy. Aside of fiscal autonomy, the nationalities—Andalusia, the Basque Country, Catalonia, and Galicia—were devolved more powers than the rest of the communities, among them the ability of the regional president to dissolve the parliament and call for elections at any time. In addition, the Basque Country, Catalonia and Navarre have police corps of their own: Ertzaintza, Mossos d'Esquadra and the Policía Foral respectively. Other communities have more limited forces or none at all, like the Policía Autónoma Andaluza[98] in Andalusia or the BESCAM in Madrid.

Nonetheless, recent amendments to existing Statutes of Autonomy or the promulgation of new Statutes altogether, have reduced the asymmetry between the powers originally granted to the nationalities and the rest of the regions.

Finally, along with the 17 autonomous communities, two autonomous cities are also part of the State of Autonomies and are first-order territorial divisions: Ceuta and Melilla. These are two exclaves located in the northern African coast.

Provinces and municipalities
Main articles: Provinces of Spain and Municipalities of Spain
Autonomous communities are subdivided into provinces, which served as their territorial building blocks. In turn, provinces are integrated by municipalities. The existence of both the provinces and the municipalities is guaranteed and protected by the constitution, not necessarily by the Statutes of Autonomy themselves. Municipalities are granted autonomy to manage their internal affairs, and provinces are the territorial divisions designed to carry out the activities of the State.[99]

The current provincial division structure is based—with minor changes—on the 1833 territorial division by Javier de Burgos, and in all, the Spanish territory is divided into 50 provinces. The communities of Asturias, Cantabria, La Rioja, the Balearic Islands, Madrid, Murcia and Navarre are the only communities that are integrated by a single province, which is coextensive with the community itself. In these cases, the administrative institutions of the province are replaced by the governmental institutions of the community.

Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of Spain

Mariano Rajoy in a G-20 Summit in Mexico. Spain is a permanent guest of the G-20.

The Ibero-American Summit, in San Salvador, 2008

Palau Reial de Pedralbes, in Barcelona, headquarters of the Union for the Mediterranean.
After the return of democracy following the death of Franco in 1975, Spain's foreign policy priorities were to break out of the diplomatic isolation of the Franco years and expand diplomatic relations, enter the European Community, and define security relations with the West.

As a member of NATO since 1982, Spain has established itself as a participant in multilateral international security activities. Spain's EU membership represents an important part of its foreign policy. Even on many international issues beyond western Europe, Spain prefers to co-ordinate its efforts with its EU partners through the European political co-operation mechanisms.[vague]

Spain has maintained its special relations with Hispanic America and the Philippines. Its policy emphasises the concept of an Ibero-American community, essentially the renewal of the historically liberal concept of "Hispanidad" or "Hispanismo", as it is often referred to in English, which has sought to link the Iberian Peninsula with Hispanic America through language, commerce, history and culture.

Territorial disputes
Spain claims Gibraltar, a 6-square-kilometre (2.3 sq mi) Overseas Territory of the United Kingdom in the southernmost part of the Iberian Peninsula. Then a Spanish town, it was conquered by an Anglo-Dutch force in 1704 during the War of the Spanish Succession on behalf of Archduke Charles, pretender to the Spanish throne.


Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic army. According to United Nations, Spain is the administrative power of the Western Sahara de iure.[100]
The legal situation concerning Gibraltar was settled in 1713 by the Treaty of Utrecht, in which Spain ceded the territory in perpetuity to the British Crown[101] stating that, should the British abandon this post, it would be offered to Spain first. Since the 1940s Spain has called for the return of Gibraltar. The overwhelming majority of Gibraltarians strongly oppose this, along with any proposal of shared sovereignty.[102] UN resolutions call on the United Kingdom and Spain, both EU members, to reach an agreement over the status of Gibraltar.[103][104]

The Spanish claim makes a distinction between the isthmus that connects the Rock to the Spanish mainland on the one hand, and the Rock and city of Gibraltar on the other. While the Rock and city were ceded by the Treaty of Utrecht, Spain asserts that the "occupation of the isthmus is illegal and against the principles of International Law".[105] The United Kingdom relies on de facto arguments of possession by prescription in relation to the isthmus,[106] as there has been "continuous possession [of the isthmus] over a long period".[107]

Another claim by Spain is about the Savage Islands, a claim not recognised by Portugal . Spain claims that they are rocks rather than islands, therefore claiming that there is no Portuguese territorial waters around the disputed islands. On 5 July 2013, Spain sent a letter to the UN expressing these views.[108][109]

Spain claims the sovereignty over the Perejil Island, a small, uninhabited rocky islet located in the South shore of the Strait of Gibraltar. The island lies 250 metres (820 ft) just off the coast of Morocco, 8 kilometres (5.0 mi) from Ceuta and 13.5 kilometres (8.4 mi) from mainland Spain. Its sovereignty is disputed between Spain and Morocco. It was the subject of an armed incident between the two countries in 2002. The incident ended when both countries agreed to return to the status quo ante which existed prior to the Moroccan occupation of the island. The islet is now deserted and without any sign of sovereignty.

Besides the Perejil Island, the Spanish-held territories claimed by other countries are two: Morocco claims the Spanish cities of Ceuta and Melilla and the plazas de soberanía islets off the northern coast of Africa; and Portugal and the other signatories of the Treaty of Vienna(1815) and their successor states do not recognise Spain's sovereignty over the territory of Olivenza in the Alentejo region of Portugal which was annexed by Spain in 1801. Portugal stance has been the territory being de iure Portuguese territory and de facto Spanish.[110]

Military
Main article: Spanish Armed Forces

Aircraft carrier/assault ship Juan Carlos I (L61), multirole fighter Eurofighter Typhoon, Boeing CH-47 Chinook, universal tank Leopard 2
The armed forces of Spain are known as the Spanish Armed Forces (Fuerzas Armadas Españolas). Their Commander-in-chief is the King of Spain, Felipe VI.[111]

The Spanish Armed Forces are divided into three branches:[112]

Army (Ejército de Tierra)
Navy (Armada)
Air Force (Ejército del Aire)
Economy
Main article: Economy of Spain

Headquarters of Banco Santander in Santander

Financial district in downtown Madrid called AZCA
Spain's capitalist mixed economy is the 14th largest worldwide and the 5th largest in the European Union, as well as the Eurozone's 4th largest.

The centre-right government of former prime minister José María Aznar worked successfully to gain admission to the group of countries launching the euro in 1999. Unemployment stood at 7.6% in October 2006, lower than many other European countries, and significantly below Spain's early 1990s unemployment rate of at over 20%. Perennial weak points of Spain's economy include a large informal economy,[113][114][115] and an education system which OECD reports place among the poorest for developed countries, together with the United States and UK.[116]


Spain is a member of the Schengen Area, the Eurozone and the European Single Market.
By the mid-1990s the economy had recommenced the growth that had been disrupted by the global recession of the early 1990s. The strong economic growth helped the government to reduce the government debt as a percentage of GDP and Spain's high unemployment rate began to steadily decline. With the government budget in balance and inflation under control Spain was admitted into the Eurozone in 1999.

Since the 1990s some Spanish companies have gained multinational status, often expanding their activities in culturally close Latin America. Spain is the second biggest foreign investor there, after the United States. Spanish companies have also expanded into Asia, especially China and India.[117] This early global expansion is a competitive advantage over its competitors and European neighbours. The reason for this early expansion is the booming interest towards Spanish language and culture in Asia and Africa and a corporate culture that learned to take risks in unstable markets.


The Torre Agbar in Barcelona
Spanish companies invested in fields like renewable energy commercialisation (Iberdrola was the world's largest renewable energy operator[118]), technology companies like Telefónica, Abengoa, Mondragon Corporation, Movistar, Hisdesat, Indra, train manufacturers like CAF, Talgo, global corporations such as the textile company Inditex, petroleum companies like Repsol and infrastructure, with six of the ten biggest international construction firms specialising in transport being Spanish, like Ferrovial, Acciona, ACS, OHL and FCC.[119]

In 2005 the Economist Intelligence Unit's quality of life survey placed Spain among the top 10 in the world.[120] In 2013 the same survey (now called the "Where-to-be-born index"), ranked Spain 28th in the world.[121]

In 2010, the Basque city of Bilbao was awarded with the Lee Kuan Yew World City Prize,[122] and its mayor at the time, Iñaki Azkuna, was awarded the World Mayor Prize in 2012.[123] The Basque capital city of Vitoria-Gasteiz received the European Green Capital Award in 2012.[124]

Agriculture
Main article: Agriculture in Spain
Crop areas were farmed in two highly diverse manners. Areas relying on non-irrigated cultivation (secano), which made up 85% of the entire crop area, depended solely on rainfall as a source of water. They included the humid regions of the north and the northwest, as well as vast arid zones that had not been irrigated. The much more productive regions devoted to irrigated cultivation (regadío) accounted for 3 million hectares in 1986, and the government hoped that this area would eventually double, as it already had doubled since 1950. Particularly noteworthy was the development in Almería—one of the most arid and desolate provinces of Spain—of winter crops of various fruits and vegetables for export to Europe.


A vineyard of Rioja
Though only about 17% of Spain's cultivated land was irrigated, it was estimated to be the source of between 40–45% of the gross value of crop production and of 50% of the value of agricultural exports. More than half of the irrigated area was planted in corn, fruit trees, and vegetables. Other agricultural products that benefited from irrigation included grapes, cotton, sugar beets, potatoes, legumes, olive trees, mangos, strawberries, tomatoes, and fodder grasses. Depending on the nature of the crop, it was possible to harvest two successive crops in the same year on about 10% of the country's irrigated land.

Citrus fruits, vegetables, cereal grains, olive oil, and wine—Spain's traditional agricultural products—continued to be important in the 1980s. In 1983 they represented 12%, 12%, 8%, 6%, and 4%, respectively, of the country's agricultural production. Because of the changed diet of an increasingly affluent population, there was a notable increase in the consumption of livestock, poultry, and dairy products. Meat production for domestic consumption became the single most important agricultural activity, accounting for 30% of all farm-related production in 1983. Increased attention to livestock was the reason that Spain became a net importer of grains. Ideal growing conditions, combined with proximity to important north European markets, made citrus fruits Spain's leading export. Fresh vegetables and fruits produced through intensive irrigation farming also became important export commodities, as did sunflower seed oil that was produced to compete with the more expensive olive oils in oversupply throughout the Mediterranean countries of the European Community.

Tourism
Main article: Tourism in Spain

Benidorm, one of Europe's largest coastal tourist destinations

Frías is a main rural destination, next to Las Loras[125] geopark, Hoces del Ebro[126] natural park and Poza de la Sal, place of birth of environamentalist Félix Rodríguez de la Fuente.
The climate of Spain, its geographic location, popular coastlines, diverse landscapes, historical legacy, vibrant culture and excellent infrastructure, has made Spain's international tourist industry among the largest in the world. In the last five decades, international tourism in Spain has grown to become the second largest in the world in terms of spending, worth approximately 40 billion Euros or about 5% of GDP in 2006.[127][128]

Castile and Leon is the Spanish leadrer in rural tourism linked to its environamental and architectonical heritage.

Energy
Main article: Energy in Spain
Spain is one of the world's leading countries in the development and production of renewable energy. In 2010 Spain became the solar power world leader when it overtook the United States with a massive power station plant called La Florida, near Alvarado, Badajoz.[129][130] Spain is also Europe's main producer of wind energy. In 2010 its wind turbines generated 42,976 GWh, which accounted for 16.4% of all electrical energy produced in Spain.[131][132][133] On 9 November 2010, wind energy reached an instantaneous historic peak covering 53% of mainland electricity demand[134] and generating an amount of energy that is equivalent to that of 14 nuclear reactors.[135] Other renewable energies used in Spain are hydroelectric, biomass and marine (2 power plants under construction).[136]

Non-renewable energy sources used in Spain are nuclear (8 operative reactors), gas, coal, and oil. Fossil fuels together generated 58% of Spain's electricity in 2009, just below the OECD mean of 61%. Nuclear power generated another 19%, and wind and hydro about 12% each.[137]

Transport
Main article: Transport in Spain

A RENFE Class 730 train on the Viaducto Martin Gil near Zamora
The Spanish road system is mainly centralised, with six highways connecting Madrid to the Basque Country, Catalonia, Valencia, West Andalusia, Extremadura and Galicia. Additionally, there are highways along the Atlantic (Ferrol to Vigo), Cantabrian (Oviedo to San Sebastián) and Mediterranean (Girona to Cádiz) coasts. Spain aims to put one million electric cars on the road by 2014 as part of the government's plan to save energy and boost energy efficiency.[138] The former Minister of Industry Miguel Sebastián said that "the electric vehicle is the future and the engine of an industrial revolution."[139]

Spain has the most extensive high-speed rail network in Europe, and the second-most extensive in the world after China.[140][141] As of October 2010, Spain has a total of 3,500 km (2,174.80 mi) of high-speed tracks linking Málaga, Seville, Madrid, Barcelona, Valencia and Valladolid, with the trains reaching speeds up to 300 km/h (190 mph). On average, the Spanish high-speed train is the fastest one in the world, followed by the Japanese bullet train and the French TGV.[142] Regarding punctuality, it is second in the world (98.54% on-time arrival) after the Japanese Shinkansen (99%).[143] Should the aims of the ambitious AVE programme (Spanish high speed trains) be met, by 2020 Spain will have 7,000 km (4,300 mi) of high-speed trains linking almost all provincial cities to Madrid in less than three hours and Barcelona within four hours.

There are 47 public airports in Spain. The busiest one is the airport of Madrid (Barajas), with 50 million passengers in 2011, being the world's 15th busiest airport, as well as the European Union's fourth busiest. The airport of Barcelona (El Prat) is also important, with 35 million passengers in 2011, being the world's 31st-busiest airport. Other main airports are located in Majorca (23 million passengers), Málaga (13 million passengers), Las Palmas (Gran Canaria) (11 million passengers), Alicante (10 million passengers) and smaller, with the number of passengers between 4 and 10 million, for example Tenerife (two airports), Valencia, Seville, Bilbao, Ibiza, Lanzarote, Fuerteventura. Also, more than 30 airports with the number of passengers below 4 million.

Science and technology
Main article: Science and technology in Spain

Roque de los Muchachos Observatory, Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias
In the 19th and 20th centuries science in Spain was held back by severe political instability and consequent economic underdevelopment. Despite the conditions, some important scientists and engineers emerged. The most notable were Miguel Servet, Santiago Ramón y Cajal, Narcís Monturiol, Celedonio Calatayud, Juan de la Cierva, Leonardo Torres y Quevedo, Margarita Salas and Severo Ochoa.

Since 2006 the Mobile World Congress has taken place in Barcelona.

Water supply and sanitation
Main article: Water supply and sanitation in Spain
Water supply and sanitation in Spain is characterised by universal access and generally good service quality, while tariffs are among the lowest in the EU.[144] Almost half of the population is served by private or mixed private-public water companies, which operate under concession contracts with municipalities. The largest of the private water companies, with a market share of about 50% of the private concessions, is Aguas de Barcelona (Agbar). However, the large cities are all served by public companies except Barcelona and Valencia. The largest public company is Canal de Isabel II, which serves the metropolitan area of Madrid.

Droughts affect water supply in Southern Spain, which increasingly is turning towards seawater desalination to meet its water needs.

Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Spain
See also: List of Spanish autonomous communities by population
In 2008 the population of Spain officially reached 46 million people, as recorded by the Padrón municipal (Spain's Municipal Register).[145] Spain's population density, at 91/km² (235/sq mi), is lower than that of most Western European countries and its distribution across the country is very unequal. With the exception of the region surrounding the capital, Madrid, the most populated areas lie around the coast. The population of Spain more than doubled since 1900, when it stood at 18.6 million, principally due to the spectacular demographic boom in the 1960s and early 1970s.[146]

Native Spaniards make up 88% of the total population of Spain. After the birth rate plunged in the 1980s and Spain's population growth rate dropped, the population again trended upward, based initially on the return of many Spaniards who had emigrated to other European countries during the 1970s, and more recently, fuelled by large numbers of immigrants who make up 12% of the population. The immigrants originate mainly in Latin America (39%), North Africa (16%), Eastern Europe (15%), and Sub-Saharan Africa (4%).[147] In 2005, Spain instituted a three-month amnesty programme through which certain hitherto undocumented aliens were granted legal residency.[citation needed]

In 2008, Spain granted citizenship to 84,170 persons, mostly to people from Ecuador, Colombia and Morocco.[148] A sizeable portion of foreign residents in Spain also comes from other Western and Central European countries. These are mostly British, French, German, Dutch, and Norwegian. They reside primarily on the Mediterranean coast and the Balearic islands, where many choose to live their retirement or telecommute.

Substantial populations descended from Spanish colonists and immigrants exist in other parts of the world, most notably in Latin America. Beginning in the late 15th century, large numbers of Iberian colonists settled in what became Latin America and at present most white Latin Americans (who make up about one-third of Latin America's population) are of Spanish or Portuguese origin. Around 240,000 Spaniards emigrated in the 16th century, mostly to Peru and Mexico.[149] Another 450,000 left in the 17th century.[150] Between 1846 and 1932 it is estimated that nearly 5 million Spaniards emigrated to the Americas, especially to Argentina and Brazil.[151] Approximately two million Spaniards migrated to other Western European countries between 1960 and 1975. During the same period perhaps 300,000 went to Latin America.[152]

Urbanisation
  v t e
Largest cities or towns in Spain
Instituto Nacional de Estadística (INE)
Rank	Name	Autonomous community	Pop.	Rank	Name	Autonomous community	Pop.	
Madrid
Madrid
Barcelona
Barcelona	1	Madrid	Madrid	3,165,235	11	Alicante	Valencia	332,067	Valencia
Valencia
Seville
Seville
2	Barcelona	Catalonia	1,602,386	12	Córdoba	Andalusia	328,041
3	Valencia	Valencia	786,424	13	Valladolid	Castile and León	306,830
4	Seville	Andalusia	696,676	14	Vigo	Galicia	294,997
5	Zaragoza	Aragon	666,058	15	Gijón	Asturias	275,735
6	Málaga	Andalusia	566,913	16	L'Hospitalet	Catalonia	253,518
7	Murcia	Murcia	439,712	17	A Coruña	Galicia	244,810
8	Palma	Balearic Islands	399,093	18	Vitoria-Gasteiz	Basque Country	242 092
9	Las Palmas	Canary Islands	382,283	19	Granada	Andalusia	237,540
10	Bilbao	Basque Country	347,574	20	Elche	Valencia	228,647
Metropolitan areas
Main article: List of metropolitan areas in Spain

Geographical distribution of the Spanish population in 2008

The urban transformation of Bilbao has been hailed as an example of "smart city".[153][154][155]
Source: "Áreas urbanas +50", Ministry of Public Works and Transport (2013)[156]

e • d 
Rank	Metro area	Autonomous
community	Population
Government data	Other estimations
1	Madrid	Madrid	6,052,247	5.4 – 6.5 m[157][158]
2	Barcelona	Catalonia	5,030,679	4.2 – 5.1 m[157][159]
3	Valencia	Valencia	1,551,585	1.5 – 2.3 m[160]
4	Seville	Andalusia	1,294,867	1.2 – 1.3 m
5	Málaga	Andalusia	953,251	
6	Bilbao	Basque Country	910,578	
7	Oviedo–Gijón–Avilés	Asturias	835,053	
8	Zaragoza	Aragon	746,152	
9	Alicante–Elche	Valencia	698,662	
10	Murcia	Murcia	643,854	
Peoples
Main articles: Spanish people and Nationalisms and regionalisms of Spain
The Spanish Constitution of 1978, in its second article, recognises several contemporary entities—nationalities—[m] and regions, within the context of the Spanish nation.

Spain is de facto a plurinational state.[161][162] The idendity of Spain rather accrues of an overlap of different territorial and ethnolinguistic identities than of a sole Spanish identity. In some cases some of the territorial identities may conflict with the dominant Spanish culture. Distinct traditional identities within Spain include the Basques, Catalans, Galicians, Andalusians and Valencians,[163] although to some extent all of the 17 autonomous communities may claim a distinct local identity.

It is this last feature of "shared identity" between the more local level or autonomous community and the Spanish level which makes the identity question in Spain complex and far from univocal.

Minority groups


Ceuta and Melilla are spanish cities in north Africa with an important minority of berbers
Spain has a number of descendants of populations from former colonies, especially Latin America and North Africa. Smaller numbers of immigrants from several Sub-Saharan countries have recently been settling in Spain. There are also sizeable numbers of Asian immigrants, most of whom are of Middle Eastern, South Asian and Chinese origin. The single largest group of immigrants are European; represented by large numbers of Romanians, Britons, Germans, French and others.[164]

The arrival of the gitanos, a Romani people, began in the 16th century; estimates of the Spanish Roma population range from 750,000 to over one million.[165][166][167][168][169] There are also the mercheros (also quinquis), a formerly nomadic minority group. Their origin is unclear.

Historically, Sephardi Jews and Moriscos are the main minority groups originated in Spain and with a contribution to Spanish culture.[170] The Spanish government is offering Spanish nationality to Sephardi Jews.[171]

Immigration
Main article: Immigration to Spain

Percentage distribution of foreign population in Spain in 2005
According to the Spanish government there were 5.7 million foreign residents in Spain in 2011, or 12% of the total population. According to residence permit data for 2011, more than 860,000 were Romanian, about 770,000 were Moroccan, approximately 390,000 were British, and 360,000 were Ecuadorian.[172] Other sizeable foreign communities are Colombian, Bolivian, German, Italian, Bulgarian, and Chinese. There are more than 200,000 migrants from Sub-Saharan Africa living in Spain, principally Senegaleses and Nigerians.[173] Since 2000, Spain has experienced high population growth as a result of immigration flows, despite a birth rate that is only half the replacement level. This sudden and ongoing inflow of immigrants, particularly those arriving illegally by sea, has caused noticeable social tension.[174]

Within the EU, Spain had the 2nd highest immigration rate in percentage terms after Cyprus, but by a great margin, the highest in absolute numbers, up to 2008.[175] The number of immigrants in Spain had grown up from 500,000 people in 1996 to 5.2 million in 2008 out of a total population of 46 million.[176][177] In 2005 alone, a regularisation programme increased the legal immigrant population by 700,000 people.[178] There are a number of reasons for the high level of immigration, including Spain's cultural ties with Latin America, its geographical position, the porosity of its borders, the large size of its underground economy and the strength of the agricultural and construction sectors, which demand more low cost labour than can be offered by the national workforce.

Another statistically significant factor is the large number of residents of EU origin typically retiring to Spain's Mediterranean coast. In fact, Spain was Europe's largest absorber of migrants from 2002 to 2007, with its immigrant population more than doubling as 2.5 million people arrived.[179] In 2008, prior to the onset of the economic crisis, the Financial Times reported that Spain was the most favoured destination for Western Europeans considering a move from their own country and seeking jobs elsewhere in the EU.[180]

In 2008, the government instituted a "Plan of Voluntary Return" which encouraged unemployed immigrants from outside the EU to return to their home countries and receive several incentives, including the right to keep their unemployment benefits and transfer whatever they contributed to the Spanish Social Security.[181] The programme had little effect; during its first two months, just 1,400 immigrants took up the offer.[182] What the programme failed to do, the sharp and prolonged economic crisis has done from 2010 to 2011 in that tens of thousands of immigrants have left the country due to lack of jobs. In 2011 alone, more than half a million people left Spain.[183] For the first time in decades the net migration rate was expected to be negative, and nine out of 10 emigrants were foreigners.[183]

Languages
Main article: Languages of Spain

The languages of Spain (simplified)
Spain is legally multilingual,[184] and the constitution establishes that the nation will protect "all Spaniards and the peoples of Spain in the exercise of human rights, their cultures and traditions, languages and institutions.[185]

Spanish (español)— recognised in the constitution as Castilian (castellano)—is the official language of the entire country, and it is the right and duty of every Spaniard to know the language. The constitution also establishes that "all other Spanish languages"—that is, all other languages of Spain—will also be official in their respective autonomous communities in accordance to their Statutes, their organic regional legislations, and that the "richness of the distinct linguistic modalities of Spain represents a patrimony which will be the object of special respect and protection."[186]

The other official languages of Spain, co-official with Spanish are:

Basque (euskara) in the Basque Country and Navarre;
Catalan (català) in Catalonia, the Balearic Islands and in the Valencian Community, where its distinct modality of the language is officially known as Valencian (valencià); and
Galician (galego) in Galicia
As a percentage of the general population, Basque is spoken by 2%, Catalan by 19% or Valencian as it is called in the Communidad Valenciana - (understood by 23%, as mother tongue by 9% and as habitual/preferred by 13%), and Galician by 5% of all Spaniards.[187]


In the riojan monastery of San Millán de Suso there were found the first written records of both basque and Spanish languages (Glosas Emilianenses).
In Catalonia, Aranese (aranés), a local variety of the Occitan language, has been declared co-official along with Catalan and Spanish since 2006. Occitan itself is spoken only in the comarca of Val d'Aran by roughly 6,700 people. Other Romance minority languages, though not official, have special recognition, such as the Astur-Leonese group (Asturian – asturianu, also called bable – in Asturias[188] and Leonese – llionés – in Castile and León) and Aragonese (aragonés) in Aragon.

In the North African Spanish autonomous city of Melilla, Riff Berber is spoken by a significant part of the population. In the tourist areas of the Mediterranean coast and the islands, English and German are widely spoken by tourists, foreign residents, and tourism workers.[189]

Education
Main article: Education in Spain

Concepción Arenal, krausist and pioneer of the Asociación para la Enseñanza de la Mujer
State education in Spain is free and compulsory from the age of six to sixteen. The current education system is regulated by the 2006 educational law, LOE (Ley Orgánica de Educación), or Fundamental Law for the Education.[190] In 2014, the LOE was partially modified by the newer and controversial LOMCE law (Ley Orgánica para la Mejora de la Calidad Educativa), or Fundamental Law for the Improvement of the Education System, commonly called Ley Wert (Wert Law).[191] Since 1970 to 2014, Spain has had seven different educational laws (LGE, LOECE, LODE, LOGSE, LOPEG, LOE and LOMCE).[192]

Institución Libre de Enseñanza was an educational project that developed in Spain for the half a century of about 1876–1936 by Francisco Giner de los Ríos and Gumersindo de Azcárate. The institute was inspired by the philosophy of Krausism. Concepción Arenal in feminism and Santiago Ramón y Cajal in neuroscience were in the movement.

Health
Main article: Health care in Spain
The health care system of Spain (Spanish National Health System) is considered one of the best in the world, in 7th position in the ranking elaborated by the World Health Organization.[193] The health care is public, universal and free for any legal citizen of Spain.[194] The total health spending is 9.4% of the GDP, slightly above the average of 9.3% of the OECD.

Religion
Main article: Religion in Spain
See also: Christianity in Spain, Islam in Spain, Judaism in Spain, Hinduism in Spain, and Bahá'í Faith in Spain
Religions in Spain
Roman Catholicism	
?
70.2%
No Religion	
?
25.0%
Other Faith	
?
2.6%
No Answer	
?
2.1%
Numbers from the following source:[4]
Roman Catholicism has long been the main religion of Spain, and although it no longer has official status by law, in all public schools in Spain students have to choose either a religion or ethics class. Catholicism is the religion most commonly taught, although the teaching of Islam,[195] Judaism,[196] and evangelical Christianity[197] is also recognised in law. According to a June 2016 study by the Spanish Centre for Sociological Research about 70% of Spaniards self-identify as Catholics, 2% other faith, and about 25% identify with no religion. Most Spaniards do not participate regularly in religious services. This same study shows that of the Spaniards who identify themselves as religious, 59% hardly ever or never go to church, 16% go to church some times a year, 9% some time per month and 15% every Sunday or multiple times per week.[4] Recent polls and surveys have revealed that atheists and agnostics comprise anywhere from 20% to 27% of the Spanish population.[4][198][199]


Santiago de Compostela Cathedral, A Coruña
Altogether, about 9% of the entire Spanish population attends religious services at least once per month.[4] Though Spanish society has become considerably more secular in recent decades, the influx of Latin American immigrants, who tend to be strong Catholic practitioners, has helped the Catholic Church to recover.

There have been four Spanish Popes. Damasus I, Calixtus III, Alexander VI and Benedict XIII. Spanish mysticism was an important intellectual fight against Protestantism with Teresa of Ávila, a reformist nun, ahead. The Society of Jesus was founded by Ignatius of Loyola and Francisco Javier. In the 1960s, Jesuits Pedro Arrupe and Ignacio Ellacuría were inside the movement of Liberation Theology.

Protestant churches have about 1,200,000 members.[200] There are about 105,000 Jehovah's Witnesses. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has approximately 46,000 adherents in 133 congregations in all regions of the country and has a temple in the Moratalaz District of Madrid.[201]




Ignatius of Loyola, Teresa de Jesús and Francisco Javier prominent figures of Counter-Reformation.
A study made by the Union of Islamic Communities of Spain demonstrated that there were about 1,700,000 inhabitants of Muslim background living in Spain as of 2012, accounting for 3–4% of the total population of Spain. The vast majority was composed of immigrants and descendants originating from Morocco and other African countries. More than 514,000 (30%) of them had Spanish nationality.[202]

The recent waves of immigration have also led to an increasing number of Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs and Muslims. After the Reconquista in 1492, Muslims did not live in Spain for centuries. Late 19th-century colonial expansion in northwestern Africa gave a number of residents in Spanish Morocco and Western Sahara full citizenship. Their ranks have since been bolstered by recent immigration, especially from Morocco and Algeria.

Judaism was practically non-existent in Spain from the 1492 expulsion until the 19th century, when Jews were again permitted to enter the country. Currently there are around 62,000 Jews in Spain, or 0.14% of the total population. Most are arrivals in the past century, while some are descendants of earlier Spanish Jews. Approximately 80,000 Jews are thought to have lived in Spain prior to its expulsion.[203] However the Jewish Encylopedia states the number over 800,000 to be too large and 235,000 as too small: 165,000 is given as expelled as possibly too small in favor or 200,000, and the numbers of converts after the 1391 pograms as less. Other sources suggest 200,000 converts mostly after the pogroms of 1391 and upwards of 100,000 expelled.

Culture
Main article: Culture of Spain
Culturally, Spain is a Western country. Almost every aspect of Spanish life is permeated by its Roman heritage, making Spain one of the major Latin countries of Europe. Spanish culture is marked by strong historic ties to Catholicism, which played a pivotal role in the country's formation and subsequent identity. Spanish art, architecture, cuisine, and music has been shaped by successive waves of foreign invaders, as well as by the country's Mediterranean climate and geography. The centuries-long colonial era globalised Spanish language and culture, with Spain also absorbing the cultural and commercial products of its diverse empire.

World Heritage Sites
Main article: World Heritage Sites in Spain
See also: Castles in Spain and Cathedrals in Spain

The pre-Romanesque architecture of Santa María del Naranco

Alcázar of Segovia

Aljafería of Zaragoza

Llotja de la Seda in Valencia

The Hanging Houses of Cuenca at the Museo de Arte Abstracto Español

The Sagrada Família in Barcelona
It should be noted that after Italy (49) and China (45), Spain is the third country in the world with the most World Heritage Sites. At the present time it has 44 recognised sites, including the landscape of Monte Perdido in the Pyrenees, which is shared with France, the Prehistoric Rock Art Sites of the Côa Valley and Siega Verde, which is shared with Portugal (the Portuguese part being in the Côa Valley, Guarda), and the Heritage of Mercury, shared with Slovenia.[204] In addition, Spain has also 14 Intangible cultural heritage, or "Human treasures", Spain ranks first in Europe according to UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage List, tied with Croatia.[205]

1984 – Alhambra, Generalife and Albayzín (Granada, Andalusia).
1984 – Burgos Cathedral (Burgos, Castile-León).
1984 – Historic centre of Córdoba (Córdoba, Andalusia).
1984 – Monastery and Royal Site of El Escorial (Madrid).
1984 – Works of Antoni Gaudí (Barcelona, Catalonia).
1985 – Cave of Altamira and Palaeolithic Cave Art of Northern Spain (Asturias, Basque Country and Cantabria regions).
1985 – Monuments of Oviedo and the Kingdom of Asturias (Asturias).
1985 – Old Town of Ávila with its Extra-Muros Churches (Ávila, Castile-León).
1985 – Old Town of Segovia and its Aqueduct (Segovia, Castile-León).
1985 – Santiago de Compostela (Old Town) (A Coruña, Galicia).
1986 – Garajonay National Park (La Gomera, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Canary Islands).
1986 – Historic City of Toledo (Toledo, Castile-La Mancha).
1986 – Mudéjar Architecture of Aragon (Provinces of Teruel and Zaragoza in Aragon).
1986 – Old Town of Cáceres (Cáceres, Extremadura).
1987 – Cathedral, Alcázar and Archivo de Indias in Seville (Seville, Andalusia).
1988 – Old City of Salamanca (Salamanca, Castile-León).
1991 – Poblet Monastery (Tarragona, Catalonia).
1993 – Archaeological Ensemble of Mérida (Badajoz, Extremadura).
1993 – Route of Santiago de Compostela (Provinces of Burgos, León and Palencia in Castile-León, Provinces of A Coruña and Lugo in Galicia, La Rioja, Navarre, and the Province of Huesca in Aragon).
1993 – Royal Monastery of Santa María de Guadalupe (Cáceres, Extremadura).
1994 – Doñana National Park (Provinces of Cádiz, Huelva and Seville in Andalusia).
1996 – Historic Walled Town of Cuenca (Cuenca, Castile-La Mancha).
1996 – Silk Exchange of Valencia (Valencia).
1997 – Las Médulas (León, Castile-León).
1997 – Palau de la Música Catalana and Hospital de Sant Pau in Barcelona (Barcelona, Catalonia).
1997 – Pirineos – Monte Perdido (Huesca, Aragon – Spanish part / Midi-Pyrénées and Aquitaine – French part). (Shared with France).
1997 – San Millán Yuso and Suso Monasteries (La Rioja).
1998 (2010) – Prehistoric Rock Art Sites in the Côa Valley (Guarda, Norte Region – Portuguese part) and Siega Verde (Salamanca, Castile-León – Spanish part). (Shared with Portugal).
1998 – Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin on the Iberian Peninsula (Andalusia, Aragon, Castile-La Mancha, Catalonia, Murcia and Valencia regions).
1998 – University and Historic Precinct of Alcalá de Henares (Madrid).
1999 – Ibiza, Biodiversity and Culture (Ibiza, Balearic Islands).
1999 – San Cristóbal de La Laguna (Tenerife, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Canary Islands).
2000 – Archaeological Ensemble of Tarraco (Tarragona, Catalonia).
2000 – Archaeological Site of Atapuerca (Burgos, Castile-León).
2000 – Catalan Romanesque Churches of the Vall de Boí (Lleida, Catalonia).
2000 – Palmeral of Elche (Alicante, Valencia).
2000 – Roman Walls of Lugo (Lugo, Galicia).
2001 – Aranjuez Cultural Landscape (Madrid).
2003 – Renaissance Monumental Ensembles of Úbeda and Baeza (Jaén, Andalusia).
2006 – Vizcaya Bridge (Biscay, Basque Country).
2007 – Teide National Park (Tenerife, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Canary Islands).
2009 – Tower of Hercules (A Coruña, Galicia).
2011 – Cultural Landscape of the Serra de Tramuntana (Majorca, Balearic Islands).
2012 – Heritage of Mercury. Almadén (Ciudad Real, Castile-La Mancha – Spanish part) and Idrija (Slovene Littoral – Slovenian part). (Shared with Slovenia).
Literature
Main articles: Spanish literature, Royal Spanish Academy, and Instituto Cervantes
See also: Basque literature, Catalan literature, Galician literature, and Latin American literature

Corral de comedias de Almagro, Spanish Golden Age theatre with Lope de Vega and Calderon de la Barca
The earliest recorded examples of vernacular Romance-based literature date from the same time and location, the rich mix of Muslim, Jewish, and Christian cultures in Muslim Spain, in which Maimonides, Averroes, and others worked, the Kharjas (Jarchas).


Bronze statues of Don Quixote and Sancho Panza in the Plaza de España in Madrid
During the Reconquista, the epic poem Cantar de Mio Cid was written about a real man—his battles, conquests, and daily life.

Other major plays from the medieval times were Mester de Juglaría, Mester de Clerecía, Coplas por la muerte de su padre or El Libro de buen amor (The Book of Good Love).

During the Renaissance the major plays are La Celestina and El Lazarillo de Tormes, while many religious literature was created with poets as Luis de León, San Juan de la Cruz, Santa Teresa de Jesús, etc.

The Baroque is the most important period for Spanish culture. We are in the times of the Spanish Empire. The famous Don Quijote de La Mancha by Miguel de Cervantes was written in this time. Other writers from the period are: Francisco de Quevedo, Lope de Vega, Calderón de la Barca or Tirso de Molina.

During the Enlightenment we find names such as Leandro Fernández de Moratín, Benito Jerónimo Feijóo, Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos or Leandro Fernández de Moratín.


Tirant lo Blanch final page
During the Romanticism, José Zorrilla created one of the most emblematic figures in European literature in Don Juan Tenorio. Other writers from this period are Gustavo Adolfo Bécquer, José de Espronceda, Rosalía de Castro or Mariano José de Larra.

In Realism we find names such as Benito Pérez Galdós, Emilia Pardo Bazán, Leopoldo Alas (Clarín), Concepción Arenal, Vicente Blasco Ibáñez and Menéndez Pelayo. Realism offered depictions of contemporary life and society 'as they were'. In the spirit of general "Realism", Realist authors opted for depictions of everyday and banal activities and experiences, instead of romanticised or stylised presentations.

The group that has become known as the Generation of 1898 was marked by the destruction of Spain's fleet in Cuba by US gunboats in 1898, which provoked a cultural crisis in Spain. The "Disaster" of 1898 led established writers to seek practical political, economic, and social solutions in essays grouped under the literary heading of Regeneracionismo. For a group of younger writers, among them Miguel de Unamuno, Pío Baroja, and José Martínez Ruiz (Azorín), the Disaster and its cultural repercussions inspired a deeper, more radical literary shift that affected both form and content. These writers, along with Ramón del Valle-Inclán, Antonio Machado, Ramiro de Maeztu, and Ángel Ganivet, came to be known as the Generation of '98.




Ramón del Valle-Inclán, Benito Pérez Galdós and Federico García Lorca
The Generation of 1914 or Novecentismo. The next supposed "generation" of Spanish writers following those of '98 already calls into question the value of such terminology. By the year 1914—the year of the outbreak of the First World War and of the publication of the first major work of the generation's leading voice, José Ortega y Gasset—a number of slightly younger writers had established their own place within the Spanish cultural field.

Leading voices include the poet Juan Ramón Jiménez, the academics and essayists Ramón Menéndez Pidal, Gregorio Marañón, Manuel Azaña, Maria Zambrano, Eugeni d'Ors, Clara Campoamor and Ortega y Gasset, and the novelists Gabriel Miró, Ramón Pérez de Ayala, and Ramón Gómez de la Serna. While still driven by the national and existential questions that obsessed the writers of '98, they approached these topics with a greater sense of distance and objectivity. Salvador de Madariaga, another prominent intellectual and writer, was one of the founders of the College of Europe and the composer of the constitutive manifest of the Liberal International.

The Generation of 1927, where poets Pedro Salinas, Jorge Guillén, Federico García Lorca, Vicente Aleixandre, Dámaso Alonso. All were scholars of their national literary heritage, again evidence of the impact of the calls of regeneracionistas and the Generation of 1898 for Spanish intelligence to turn at least partially inwards.


Miguel Delibes describes the situation of rural Spain after the Rural flight in the 1950s.
The two main writers in the second half of the 20th century were the Nobel Prize in Literature laureate Camilo José Cela and Miguel Delibes from Generation of '36. Spain is one of the countries with the most number of laureates with the Nobel Prize in Literature, and with Latin American laureates they made the Spanish language literature one of the most laureates of all. The Spanish writers are: José Echegaray, Jacinto Benavente, Juan Ramón Jiménez, Vicente Aleixandre and Camilo José Cela. The Portuguese writer José Saramago, also awarded with the prize, lived for many years in Spain and spoke both Portuguese and Spanish. Saramago was also well known by his Iberist ideas.

The Generation of '50 are also known as the children of the civil war. Rosa Chacel, Gloria Fuertes, Jaime Gil de Biedma, Juan Goytisolo, Carmen Martín Gaite, Ana María Matute, Juan Marsé, Blas de Otero, Gabriel Celaya, Antonio Gamoneda, Rafael Sánchez Ferlosio or Ignacio Aldecoa.

Premio Planeta de Novela and Miguel de Cervantes Prize are the two main awards nowadays in Spanish literature.

Art
Main article: Spanish art

Las Meninas (1656), Diego Velázquez, Museo del Prado
Artists from Spain have been highly influential in the development of various European and American artistic movements. Due to historical, geographical and generational diversity, Spanish art has known a great number of influences. The Mediterranean heritage with Greco-Roman and some Moorish and influences in Spain, especially in Andalusia is still evident today. European influences include Italy, Germany and France, especially during the Renaissance Spanish Baroque and Neoclassical periods. There are many other autochthonous styles such as the Pre-Romanesque art and architecture, Herrerian architecture or the Isabelline Gothic.

During the Golden Age we find painters such as El Greco, José de Ribera, Bartolomé Esteban Murillo and Francisco Zurbarán. Also inside Baroque period Diego Velázquez created some of the most famous Spanish portraits, like Las Meninas or Las Hilanderas.

Francisco Goya painted during a historical period that includes the Spanish Independence War, the fights between liberals and absolutists, and the raise of contemporary state-nations.

Joaquín Sorolla is a well-known impressionist painter and there are many important Spanish painters belonging to the modernism art movement, including Pablo Picasso, Salvador Dalí, Juan Gris and Joan Miró.

Sculpture

The Comb of the Wind of Eduardo Chillida in San Sebastián
The Plateresque style extended from beginnings of the 16th century until the last third of the century and its stylistic influence pervaded the works of all great Spanish artists of the time. Alonso Berruguete (Valladolid School) is called the "Prince of Spanish sculpture". His main works were the upper stalls of the choir of the Cathedral of Toledo, the tomb of Cardinal Tavera in the same Cathedral, and the altarpiece of the Visitation in the church of Santa Úrsula in the same locality. Other notable sculptors were Bartolomé Ordóñez, Diego de Siloé, Juan de Juni and Damián Forment.

There were two Schools of special flair and talent: the Seville School, to which Juan Martínez Montañés belonged, whose most celebrated works are the Crucifix in the Cathedral of Seville, another in Vergara, and a Saint John; and the Granada School, to which Alonso Cano belonged, to whom an Immaculate Conception and a Virgin of Rosary, are attributed.

Other notable Andalusian Baroque sculptors were Pedro de Mena, Pedro Roldán and his daughter Luisa Roldán, Juan de Mesa and Pedro Duque Cornejo. In the 20th century the most important Spanish sculptors were Julio González, Pablo Gargallo, Eduardo Chillida and Pablo Serrano.

Cinema
Main article: Cinema of Spain

Pedro Almodóvar and Penélope Cruz in Oviedo (Princess of Asturias Awards)
Spanish cinema has achieved major international success including Oscars for recent films such as Pan's Labyrinth and Volver.[206] In the long history of Spanish cinema, the great filmmaker Luis Buñuel was the first to achieve world recognition, followed by Pedro Almodóvar in the 1980s (La Movida Madrileña). Mario Camus and Pilar Miró worked together in Curro Jiménez.

Spanish cinema has also seen international success over the years with films by directors like Segundo de Chomón, Florián Rey, Luis García Berlanga, Carlos Saura, Julio Medem, Isabel Coixet, Alejandro Amenábar, Icíar Bollaín and brothers David Trueba and Fernando Trueba.

Actresses Sara Montiel and Penélope Cruz or actor Antonio Banderas are among those who have become Hollywood stars.

International Film Festivals of Valladolid and San Sebastian are the oldest and more relevant in Spain.

Architecture
Main article: Spanish architecture

Historic old town of Cáceres

The modern Hemispheric at the Ciutat de les Arts i les Ciències in Valencia
Due to its historical and geographical diversity, Spanish architecture has drawn from a host of influences. An important provincial city founded by the Romans and with an extensive Roman era infrastructure, Córdoba became the cultural capital, including fine Arabic style architecture, during the time of the Islamic Umayyad dynasty.[207] Later Arab style architecture continued to be developed under successive Islamic dynasties, ending with the Nasrid, which built its famed palace complex in Granada.

Simultaneously, the Christian kingdoms gradually emerged and developed their own styles; developing a pre-Romanesque style when for a while isolated from contemporary mainstream European architectural influences during the earlier Middle Ages, they later integrated the Romanesque and Gothic streams. There was then an extraordinary flowering of the Gothic style that resulted in numerous instances being built throughout the entire territory. The Mudéjar style, from the 12th to 17th centuries, was developed by introducing Arab style motifs, patterns and elements into European architecture.

The arrival of Modernism in the academic arena produced much of the architecture of the 20th century. An influential style centred in Barcelona, known as modernisme, produced a number of important architects, of which Gaudí is one. The International style was led by groups like GATEPAC. Spain is currently experiencing a revolution in contemporary architecture and Spanish architects like Rafael Moneo, Santiago Calatrava, Ricardo Bofill as well as many others have gained worldwide renown.

Music and dance
Main article: Music of Spain

Flamenco is an Andalusian artistic form that evolved from the Seguidilla.
Spanish music is often considered abroad to be synonymous with flamenco, a West Andalusian musical genre, which, contrary to popular belief, is not widespread outside that region. Various regional styles of folk music abound in Aragon, Catalonia, Valencia, Castile, the Basque Country, Galicia, Cantabria and Asturias. Pop, rock, hip hop and heavy metal are also popular.

In the field of classical music, Spain has produced a number of noted composers such as Isaac Albéniz, Manuel de Falla and Enrique Granados and singers and performers such as Plácido Domingo, José Carreras, Montserrat Caballé, Alicia de Larrocha, Alfredo Kraus, Pablo Casals, Ricardo Viñes, José Iturbi, Pablo de Sarasate, Jordi Savall and Teresa Berganza. In Spain there are over forty professional orchestras, including the Orquestra Simfònica de Barcelona, Orquesta Nacional de España and the Orquesta Sinfónica de Madrid. Major opera houses include the Teatro Real, the Gran Teatre del Liceu, Teatro Arriaga and the El Palau de les Arts Reina Sofía.

Thousands of music fans also travel to Spain each year for internationally recognised summer music festivals Sónar which often features the top up and coming pop and techno acts, and Benicàssim which tends to feature alternative rock and dance acts.[208] Both festivals mark Spain as an international music presence and reflect the tastes of young people in the country.

Vitoria-Gasteiz jazz festival is one of the main ones on its genre.

The most popular traditional musical instrument, the guitar, originated in Spain.[209] Typical of the north are the traditional bag pipers or gaiteros, mainly in Asturias and Galicia.


Zara store in Palma de Mallorca.
Fashion
Cibeles Madrid Fashion Week is one of the most important fashion weeks in Europe.

Zara is one of the biggest prêt-a-porter fashion companies in the world.

Fashion designers as Cristóbal Balenciaga are between the most influential during the XX century.

Cuisine
Main article: Spanish cuisine

Paella, a traditional Valencian dish[210]
Spanish cuisine consists of a great variety of dishes which stem from differences in geography, culture and climate. It is heavily influenced by seafood available from the waters that surround the country, and reflects the country's deep Mediterranean roots. Spain's extensive history with many cultural influences has led to a unique cuisine. In particular, three main divisions are easily identified:

Mediterranean Spain – all such coastal regions, from Catalonia to Andalusia – heavy use of seafood, such as pescaíto frito (fried fish); several cold soups like gazpacho; and many rice-based dishes like paella from Valencia[210] and arròs negre (black rice) from Catalonia.[211]

Inner Spain – Castile – hot, thick soups such as the bread and garlic-based Castilian soup, along with substantious stews such as cocido madrileño. Food is traditionally conserved by salting, like Spanish ham, or immersed in olive oil, like Manchego cheese.

Atlantic Spain – the whole Northern coast, including Asturian, Basque, Cantabrian and Galician cuisine – vegetable and fish-based stews like caldo gallego and marmitako. Also, the lightly cured lacón ham. The best known cuisine of the northern countries often rely on ocean seafood, like the Basque-style cod, albacore or anchovy or the Galician octopus-based polbo á feira and shellfish dishes.

Sport
Main article: Sport in Spain

1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona.
While varieties of football had been played in Spain as far back as Roman times, sport in Spain has been dominated by English style association football since the early 20th century. Real Madrid C.F. and FC Barcelona are two of the most successful football clubs in the world. The country's national football team won the UEFA European Football Championship in 1964, 2008 and 2012 and the FIFA World Cup in 2010, and is the first team to ever win three back-to-back major international tournaments.

Basketball, tennis, cycling, handball, futsal, motorcycling and, lately, Formula One are also important due to the presence of Spanish champions in all these disciplines. Today, Spain is a major world sports powerhouse, especially since the 1992 Summer Olympics that were hosted in Barcelona, which stimulated a great deal of interest in sports in the country. The tourism industry has led to an improvement in sports infrastructure, especially for water sports, golf and skiing.

Rafael Nadal is the leading Spanish tennis player and has won several Grand Slam titles including the Wimbledon 2010 men's singles. In north Spain, the game of pelota is very popular. Alberto Contador is the leading Spanish cyclist and has won several Grand Tour titles including two Tour de France titles.

Public holidays and festivals
Main articles: Public holidays in Spain, Fiestas of International Tourist Interest of Spain, and Fiestas of National Tourist Interest of Spain

San Fermín festival, Pamplona
Public holidays celebrated in Spain include a mix of religious (Roman Catholic), national and regional observances. Each municipality is allowed to declare a maximum of 14 public holidays per year; up to nine of these are chosen by the national government and at least two are chosen locally.[212] Spain's National Day (Fiesta Nacional de España) is 12 October, the anniversary of the Discovery of America and commemorate Our Lady of the Pillar feast, patroness of Aragon and throughout Spain.

There are many festivals and festivities in Spain. Some of them are known worldwide, and every year millions of people from all over the world go to Spain to experience one of these festivals. One of the most famous is San Fermín, in Pamplona. While its most famous event is the encierro, or the running of the bulls, which happens at 8:00 am from 7 to 14 July, the week-long celebration involves many other traditional and folkloric events. Its events were central to the plot of The Sun Also Rises, by Ernest Hemingway, which brought it to the general attention of English-speaking people. As a result, it has become one of the most internationally renowned fiestas in Spain, with over 1,000,000 people attending every year.

Other festivals include the carnivals in the Canary Islands, the Falles in Valencia or the Holy Week in Andalusia and Castile and León.

See also
Outline of Spain
 Spain – Wikipedia book
Notes
^ Jump up to: a b The Spanish Constitution does not establish any official name for Spain, even though the terms España (Spain), Estado español (Spanish State) and Nación española (Spanish Nation) are used throughout the document. Nonetheless, the Spanish Ministry of Foreign Affairs established in an ordinance published in 1984 that the denominations España (Spain) and Reino de España (Kingdom of Spain) are equally valid to designate Spain in international treaties. The latter term is widely used by the government in national and international affairs of all kinds, including foreign treaties as well as national official documents, and is therefore recognised as the official name by many international organisations.[1]
^ Jump up to: a b In Spain, other languages have been officially recognised as legitimate autochthonous (regional) languages under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. In each of these, Spain's official name (Spanish: Reino de España, pronounced: ['reino ð(e) es'pa?a]) is as follows:
Aragonese: Reino d'Espanya, IPA: ['reino ðes'pa?a]
Asturian: Reinu d'España, IPA: ['reinu ðes'pa?a]
Basque: Espainiako Erresuma, IPA: [es?pa?iako eres?uma]
Catalan: Regne d'Espanya, IPA: ['re?n? ð?s'pa??]
Valencian: ['re?ne ðes'pa?a]
Galician: Reino de España, IPA: ['reino ð(e) es'pa?a]
Occitan: Reiaume d'Espanha, IPA: [re'jawme ðes'pa??]
Jump up ^ The official Spanish language of the State is established in the Section 3 of the Spanish Constitution of 1978 to be Castilian.[3] In some autonomous communities, Catalan 20%, Galician 5% and Basque 2% are co-official languages. Aragonese, Asturian, and Occitan (locally known as Aranese) have some degree of official recognition.
Jump up ^ European Union (EU) since 1993.
Jump up ^ As of July 2017 (www.worldometers.info/world-population/spain-population), Spain's population was 46,468,102. In the same month the number of citizens with Spanish citizenship reached 41,996,253. The number of foreigners (i.e. immigrants, ex-pats and refugees) permanently living in Spain was estimated to be at 4,426,811 (9.54%) in 2015.[6]
Jump up ^ The Peseta before 2002.
Jump up ^ The .eu domain is also used, as it is shared with other European Union member states. Also, the .cat domain is used in Catalan-speaking territories, .gal in Galicia and .eus in the Basque-speaking area.
Jump up ^ See list of transcontinental countries.
Jump up ^ The latifundia (sing., latifundium), large estates controlled by the aristocracy, were superimposed on the existing Iberian landholding system.
Jump up ^ The poets Martial, Quintilian and Lucan were also born in Hispania.
Jump up ^ The Berbers soon gave up attempting to settle the harsh lands in the north of the Meseta Central (Inner Plateau) handed to them by the Arab rulers.
Jump up ^ For the related expulsions that followed see Morisco.
Jump up ^ The term "nationality" was chosen carefully in order to avoid the more politically charged term "nation", however in recent years it has been proposed to use this term in the Constitution and officially recognise Spain as a plurinational state ("nation of nations").
References
Jump up ^ Acuerdo entre el Reino de de España y Nueva Zelanda, Acuerdo entre el reino de España y el reino de Marruecos Archived 20 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine.; licenses permissions Tratado de la Unión Europea Archived 25 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Presidency of the Government (11 October 1997). "Real Decreto 1560/1997, de 10 de octubre, por el que se regula el Himno Nacional" (PDF). Boletín Oficial del Estado núm. 244 (in Spanish).
Jump up ^ "The Spanish Constitution". Lamoncloa.gob.es. Archived from the original on 25 March 2013. Retrieved 26 April 2013.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas (Centre for Sociological Research) (October 2017). "Barómetro de septiembre de 2017" (PDF) (in Spanish). p. 41. Retrieved 13 October 2017.
Jump up ^ "Anuario estadístico de España 2008. 1ª parte: entorno físico y medio ambiente" (PDF). Instituto Nacional de Estadística (Spain). Retrieved 14 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Cifras de Población a 1 de julio de 2016. Estadística de migraciones. Primer semestre de 2016. Datos Provisionales" (in Spanish). Instituto Nacional de Estadística (INE). 16 December 2016.
^ Jump up to: a b c d "Spain". International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 8 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Gini coefficient of equivalized disposable income (source: SILC)". Eurostat Data Explorer. Retrieved 8 September 2017.
Jump up ^ "2016 Human Development Report" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2016. Retrieved 23 March 2017.
^ Jump up to: a b "Iberia vs Hispania: Origen etimológico".
Jump up ^ Esparza, José Javier (2007). La gesta española : historia de España en 48 estampas, para quienes han olvidado cuál era su nación (1a. ed.). Barcelona: Áltera. ISBN 9788496840140.
Jump up ^ "La Constitución española de 1978. Título preliminar" (in Spanish). Página oficial del Congreso de los Diputados. Retrieved 30 September 2017.
Jump up ^ Whitehouse, Mark (6 November 2010). "Number of the Week: $10.2 Trillion in Global Borrowing". The Wall Street Journal.
Jump up ^ ABC. ""I-span-ya", el misterioso origen de la palabra España".
Jump up ^ #Linch, John (director), Fernández Castro, María Cruz (del segundo tomo), Historia de España, El País, volumen II, La península Ibérica en época prerromana, p. 40. Dossier. La etimología de España; ¿tierra de conejos?, ISBN 978-84-9815-764-2
Jump up ^ Burke, Ulick Ralph (1895). A History of Spain from the Earliest Times to the Death of Ferdinand the Catholic, Volume 1. London: Longmans, Green & Co. p. 12.
Jump up ^ Wikisource-logo.svg Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Spain". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.
^ Jump up to: a b Anthon, Charles (1850). A system of ancient and mediæval geography for the use of schools and colleges. New York: Harper & Brothers. p. 14.
Jump up ^ Abrabanel, Commentary on the First Prophets (Pirush Al Nevi'im Rishonim), end of II Kings, pp. 680–681, Jerusalem 1955 (Hebrew). See also Shelomo (also spelled Sholomo, Solomon or Salomón) ibn Verga, Shevet Yehudah, pp. 6b-7a, Lemberg 1846 (Hebrew)
^ Jump up to: a b (Pike et al. 2012, pp. 1409-14013)
Jump up ^ "'First west Europe tooth' found". BBC. 30 June 2007. Retrieved 9 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Typical Aurignacian items were found in Cantabria (Morín, El Pendo, El Castillo), the Basque Country (Santimamiñe) and Catalonia. The radiocarbon datations give the following dates: 32,425 and 29,515 BP.[not in citation given][
Jump up ^ Bernaldo de Quirós Guidolti, Federico; Cabrera Valdés, Victoria (1994). "Cronología del arte paleolítico" (PDF). Complutum. 5: 265–276. ISSN 1131-6993. Retrieved 17 November 2012.
^ Jump up to: a b Payne, Stanley G. (1973). "A History of Spain and Portugal; Ch. 1 Ancient Hispania". The Library of Iberian Resources Online. Retrieved 9 August 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b Rinehart, Robert; Seeley, Jo Ann Browning (1998). "A Country Study: Spain. Chapter 1 – Hispania". Library of Congress Country Series. Retrieved 9 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Marcolongo, Andrea (2017). La lengua de los dioses: Nueve razones para amar el griego (in Greek). Penguin Random House Grupo Editorial España. ISBN 9788430618873.
Jump up ^ H. Patrick Glenn (2007). Legal Traditions of the World. Oxford University Press. pp. 218–219. Dhimma provides rights of residence in return for taxes.
Jump up ^ Lewis, Bernard (1984). The Jews of Islam. Princeton: Princeton University Press. p. 62. ISBN 978-0-691-00807-3. Dhimmi have fewer legal and social rights than Muslims, but more rights than other non-Muslims.
Jump up ^ Islamic and Christian Spain in the Early Middle Ages. Chapter 5: Ethnic Relations, Thomas F. Glick
^ Jump up to: a b c d Payne, Stanley G. (1973). "A History of Spain and Portugal; Ch. 2 Al-Andalus". The Library of Iberian Resources Online. Retrieved 9 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Moa, Pío (2010). Nueva historia de España : de la II Guerra Púnica al siglo XXI (1. ed.). Madrid: Esfera de los Libros. ISBN 9788497349529.
Jump up ^ Rinehart, Robert; Seeley, Jo Ann Browning (1998). "A Country Study: Spain – Castile and Aragon". Library of Congress Country Series. Retrieved 9 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Isabella I". Newadvent.org. 1 October 1910. Retrieved 1 March 2014.
Jump up ^ "BBC – Religions – Islam: Muslim Spain (711–1492)".
Jump up ^ "Islamic History".
Jump up ^ "Europe & the Islamic Mediterranean AD 700–1600".
Jump up ^ Payne, Stanley G. (1973). "A History of Spain and Portugal; Ch. 5 The Rise of Aragon-Catalonia". The Library of Iberian Resources Online. Retrieved 9 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "The Black Death". Channel 4. Archived from the original on 9 July 2008. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Spanish Inquisition left genetic legacy in Iberia". New Scientist. 4 December 2008. Retrieved 18 January 2014.
Jump up ^ "The Treaty of Granada, 1492". Islamic Civilisation. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b Rinehart, Robert; Seeley, Jo Ann Browning (1998). "A Country Study: Spain – The Golden Age". Library of Congress Country Series. Retrieved 9 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Imperial Spain". University of Calgary. Archived from the original on 29 June 2008. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Handbook of European History. Books.google.es. 1994. ISBN 9004097600. Retrieved 26 April 2013.
Jump up ^ Payne, Stanley G. (1973). "A History of Spain and Portugal; Ch. 13 The Spanish Empire". The Library of Iberian Resources Online. Retrieved 9 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Thomas, Hugh (2003). Rivers of gold: the rise of the Spanish Empire. London: George Weidenfeld & Nicholson. pp. passim. ISBN 978-0-297-64563-4.
Jump up ^ According to Robert Davis between 1 million and 1.25 million Europeans were captured by North African Muslim pirates and sold as slaves during the 16th and 17th centuries.
Jump up ^ "The Seventeenth-Century Decline". The Library of Iberian resources online. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Payne, Stanley G. (1973). "A History of Spain and Portugal; Ch. 14 Spanish Society and Economics in the Imperial Age". The Library of Iberian Resources Online. Retrieved 9 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Rinehart, Robert; Seeley, Jo Ann Browning (1998). "A Country Study: Spain – Spain in Decline". Library of Congress Country Series. Retrieved 9 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Rinehart, Robert; Seeley, Jo Ann Browning (1998). "A Country Study: Spain – Bourbon Spain". Library of Congress Country Series. Retrieved 9 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Gascoigne, Bamber (1998). "History of Spain: Bourbon dynasty: from AD 1700". Library of Congress Country Series. Retrieved 9 August 2008.
Jump up ^ David A. Bell. "Napoleon's Total War[permanent dead link]". TheHistoryNet.com
Jump up ^ (Gates 2001, p.20)
Jump up ^ (Gates 2001, p.467)
Jump up ^ Diccionario de Historia de España. Jaime Alvar Ezquerra.2003 Cortes of Cádiz (1812) was the first parliament of Spain with sovereign power
Jump up ^ Rodríguez. Independence of Spanish America. Cambridge University Press. [1] citation: "It met as one body, and its members represented the entire Spanish world"
Jump up ^ Spanish Civil War fighters look back, BBC News, 23 February 2003
Jump up ^ "Relatives of Spaniards who fled Franco granted citizenship". The Daily Telegraph. London. 28 December 2008. Retrieved 18 January 2014.
Jump up ^ "El contubernio que preparó la democracia". EL PAÍS.
Jump up ^ "Contubernio de Múnich: 50 años". Archived from the original on 21 October 2014.
Jump up ^ "El contubernio de Munich". LA VANGUARDIA.
Jump up ^ "Speech by Mrs Nicole FONTAINE, President of the European Parliament on the occasion of the presentation of the Sakharov Prize 2000 to Basta ya!".
Jump up ^ Pfanner, Eric (11 July 2002). "Economy reaps benefits of entry to the 'club' : Spain's euro bonanza". International Herald Tribune. Retrieved 9 August 2008. See also: "Spain's economy / Plain sailing no longer". The Economist. 3 May 2007. Retrieved 9 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Al-Qaeda 'claims Madrid bombings'". BBC. 14 March 2004. Retrieved 13 August 2008. See also: "Madrid bombers get long sentences". BBC. 31 October 2007. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Bailey, Dominic (14 March 2004). "Spain votes under a shadow". BBC. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Ortiz, Fiona (22 April 2013). "Spain's population falls as immigrants flee crisis". Reuters. Retrieved 2 September 2017.
Jump up ^ Alandete, David (27 October 2017). "Análisis | Is Catalonia independent?". El País.
Jump up ^ Piñol, Pere Ríos, Àngels (27 October 2017). "El Parlament de Cataluña aprueba la resolución para declarar la independencia". El País (in Spanish).
Jump up ^ "Catalan crisis: Regional MPs debate Spain takeover bid". BBC. 26 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017.
Jump up ^ "Catalan crisis: Spain PM Rajoy demands direct rule". BBC. 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017.
Jump up ^ "Catalonia independence: Rajoy dissolves Catalan parliament". Barcelona, Madrid: BBC News. 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017.
Jump up ^ Sandford, Alasdair (27 October 2017). "Catalonia: what direct rule from Madrid could mean". euronews. Retrieved 27 October 2017.
Jump up ^ Medina García, Eusebio (2006). «Orígenes históricos y ambigüedad de la frontera hispano-lusa (La Raya)». Revista de Estudios Extremeños. Tomo LXII (II Mayo-Agosto). 0210-2854, pags. 713–723.
Jump up ^ "World Map of the Köppen-Geiger climate classification updated – (see p.3)" (PDF). Retrieved 30 April 2011.
Jump up ^ World Map of Köppen-Geiger Climate Classification, city-data.com, April 2006.
Jump up ^ Media:Koppen World Map.png
Jump up ^ John Hooper, The New Spaniards, 2001, From Dictatorship to Democracy
Jump up ^ Spain's fast-living king turns 70 BBC News Friday, 4 January 2008 Extracted 18 June 2009
Jump up ^ "Spanish Constitution". Senado.es. Retrieved 1 November 2011.
Jump up ^ "SPAIN: No Turning Back from Path to Gender Equality". Ipsnews.net. 15 March 2007. Retrieved 5 May 2014.
Jump up ^ "Spain: Gender Equality Law Triumphs over Rightwing Opposition". ipsnews.net. Retrieved 1 November 2010.
Jump up ^ "Women in the current Spanish Congress".
Jump up ^ "Women in National Parliaments". Ipu.org. 28 February 2010. Retrieved 1 May 2010.
Jump up ^ "Human Development Report 2007/2008" (PDF). Hdr.undp.org. p. 330. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 18 January 2014.
Jump up ^ "Catalonians vote for more autonomy". CNN. 18 June 2006. Retrieved 13 August 2008. See also: "Economic Survey: Spain 2005". Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Retrieved 13 August 2008. and "Country Briefings: Spain". The Economist. Retrieved 9 August 2008. and "Swiss Experience With Decentralized Government" (PDF). The World Bank. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Jump up ^ http://www.worldpridemadrid2017.com/summit
Jump up ^ "La Constitución española de 1978. Preámbulo" (in Spanish). Página oficial del Congreso de los Diputados. Retrieved 8 October 2017.
Jump up ^ Spain 2015/2016". Amnesty International. Retrieved 22 June 2016.
Jump up ^ "Analysis of 8 years of Gender Violence Law in Spain | Gender violence and justice". justiciadegenero.com. Retrieved 9 May 2017.
Jump up ^ Rincón, Reyes (25 November 2015). "The successes and failures of Spain's fight against domestic abuse". EL PAÍS. Retrieved 9 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Global Acceptance of Homosexuality". Pew Research Center. 4 June 2013.
Jump up ^ Article 143 of the 1978 Spanish Constitution in reference to Article 2
Jump up ^ Chapter 3. Autonomous Communities. 147th Article. Spanish Constitution of 1978. Retrieved 10 December 2007
Jump up ^ "Estatut" (PDF) (in Spanish). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 March 2009. Retrieved 20 July 2009.
Jump up ^ "Nuevo Estatuto de Autonomía de Canarias". .gobiernodecanarias.org. Archived from the original on 20 January 2011. Retrieved 30 April 2011.
Jump up ^ "BOCAe32.QXD" (PDF) (in Catalan). Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 July 2009. Retrieved 20 July 2009.
Jump up ^ "Estatuto de Autonomía de Aragón". Narros.congreso.es. Archived from the original on 11 December 2009. Retrieved 20 July 2009.
Jump up ^ "Unidad de Policía de la Comunidad Autónoma de Andalucía" (in Spanish). Cartujo.org. Retrieved 23 October 2007.
Jump up ^ Articles 140 and 141. Spanish Constitution of 1978
Jump up ^ http://www.arso.org/Olasp.pdf
Jump up ^ "Tratado de Utretch – Gibraltar (Spanish)". mgar.net. Retrieved 9 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Q&A: Gibraltar's referendum". BBC News. 8 November 2002. Retrieved 19 February 2010.
Jump up ^ "Resolution 2070: Question of Gibraltar" (PDF). United Nations. 16 December 1965. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 May 2011. Retrieved 19 February 2010.
Jump up ^ "Resolution 2231: Question of Gibraltar" (PDF). United Nations. 20 December 1966. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 May 2011. Retrieved 19 February 2010.
Jump up ^ "La cuestión de Gibraltar" (in Spanish). Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Spain. January 2008. Archived from the original on 29 May 2009. Retrieved 3 January 2010.
Jump up ^ Peter Gold (2005). Gibraltar: British or Spanish?. Routledge. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-415-34795-2.
Jump up ^ UK Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (1999). "Partnership for Progress and Prosperity: Britain and the Overseas Territories. Appendix 1: Profiles for Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands & Gibraltar" (PDF). Partnership for Progress and Prosperity: Britain and the Overseas Territories. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 December 2005. Retrieved 19 December 2005.
Jump up ^ Spain's letter to the UN (PDF) (in Spanish), UN, September 2013
Jump up ^ "Spain disputes Portugal islands" The Portugal News. Retrieved 9 September 2013.
Jump up ^ Fernández Liesa, Carlos R. (2004). "La cuestión de Olivenza, a la luz del Derecho internacional público" (PDF). Encuentros: revista luso-española de investigadores en Ciencias humanas y sociales. Separatas. Ayuntamiento de Olivenza (4): 234–235. ISSN 1138-6622. Archived from the original on 29 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Article 62 of the Spanish Constitution of 1978". Official site of the Royal Household of HM the King. Archived from the original on 12 December 2007. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Article 8 of the Spanish Constitution of 1978". Official site of the Spanish Senate. Retrieved 29 November 2008.
Jump up ^ Lauren A. Benton (1990). Invisible Factories: The Informal Economy and Industrial Development in Spain. SUNY Press.
Jump up ^ Roberto A. Ferdman, Spain's Black Market Economy Is Worth 20% of Its GDP: One million Spanish people have jobs in the underground economy, The Atlantic (16 July 2013)
Jump up ^ Angel Alañón & M. Gómez-Antonio, [Estimating the size of the shadow economy in Spain: a structural model with latent variables], Applies Economics, Vol 37, Issue 9, pp. 1011–1025 (2005).
Jump up ^ "OECD report for 2006" (PDF). OECD. Retrieved 9 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "A good bet?". The Economist. Business. Madrid. 30 April 2009. Retrieved 14 May 2009.
Jump up ^ "Spain's Iberdrola signs investment accord with Gulf group Taqa". Forbes. 25 May 2008. Archived from the original on 7 June 2010.
Jump up ^ "Big in America?". The Economist. Business. Madrid. 8 April 2009. Retrieved 14 May 2009.
Jump up ^ http://www.economist.com/media/pdf/QUALITY_OF_LIFE.pdf
Jump up ^ "The lottery of life". The Economist.
Jump up ^ "Prize Laureates". leekuanyewworldcityprize.com.sg.
Jump up ^ "World Mayor: The 2012 results". worldmayor.com.
Jump up ^ "European Green Capital". Europa (web portal).
Jump up ^ http://proyectogeoparquelasloras.es/
Jump up ^ http://www.turismocastillayleon.com/es/rural-naturaleza/espacios-naturales/hoces-alto-ebro-rudron
Jump up ^ "Global Guru | analysis". The Global Guru. Archived from the original on 6 January 2011. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Economic report" (PDF). Bank of Spain. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 July 2008. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Morning Edition (15 July 2010). "Spain Is World's Leader in Solar Energy". NPR. Retrieved 4 September 2010.
Jump up ^ "Spain becomes solar power world leader". Europeanfutureenergyforum.com. 14 July 2010. Archived from the original on 24 November 2010. Retrieved 4 September 2010.
Jump up ^ "Spain becomes the first European wind energy producer after overcoming Germany for the first time". Eolic Energy News. 31 December 2010. Retrieved 30 April 2011.
Jump up ^ "Asociación Empresarial Eólica – Spanish Wind Energy Association – Energía Eólica". Aeeolica.es. Retrieved 30 April 2011.
Jump up ^ Méndez, Rafael (9 November 2009). "La eólica supera por primera vez la mitad de la producción eléctrica". El País (in Spanish). Ediciones El País. Retrieved 8 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "Wind power in Spain breaks new instantaneous power record". renovablesmadeinspain.es. 9 November 2010. Archived from the original on 14 December 2011. Retrieved 5 June 2011.
Jump up ^ Morning Edition (9 November 2010). "14 reactores nucleares movidos por el viento". El País. Retrieved 5 June 2011.
Jump up ^ Morning Edition. "La Fuerza del Mar". revista.consumer.es. Retrieved 5 June 2011.
Jump up ^ Energy in Sweden, Facts and figures, The Swedish Energy Agency, (in Swedish: Energiläget i siffror), Table for figure 49. Source: IEA/OECD [2]. Archived 16 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Algae Based Biofuels in Plain English: Why it Matters, How it Works. (algae algaebiofuels carbonsequestration valcent vertigro algaebasedbiofuels ethanol)". Triplepundit.com. 30 July 2008. Retrieved 19 November 2008.
Jump up ^ "Spain to Put 1 million Electric Cars on the Road". Triplepundit.com. 30 July 2008. Retrieved 19 November 2008.
Jump up ^ "The Need for Speed–High Speed Rail in Europe: Do You Speak Spanish? Europe on Track". Blog.raileurope.com. Archived from the original on 2 February 2011. Retrieved 1 November 2011.
Jump up ^ "Spain has developed Europe's largest high-speed rail network | Olive Press Newspaper". Theolivepress.es. Retrieved 1 November 2011.
Jump up ^ "El AVE español, el más veloz del mundo y el segundo en puntualidad". El Mundo. Spain. 10 November 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2011.
Jump up ^ "Spain powers ahead with high-speed rail". railpro.co.uk. January 2010. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 5 June 2011.
Jump up ^ IWA 2006 International Statistics for Water Services[permanent dead link]
Jump up ^ "Population Figures". Instituto Nacional de Estadística (National Statistics Institute). Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Joseph Harrison, David Corkill (2004). "Spain: a modern European economy". Ashgate Publishing. p.23. ISBN 0-7546-0145-5
Jump up ^ "Población extranjera por sexo, país de nacionalidad y edad". Instituto Nacional de Estadística. Archived from the original on 25 March 2008. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "EU27 Member States granted citizenship to 696 000 persons in 2008 Archived 6 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine." (PDF). Eurostat. 6 July 2010.
Jump up ^ "Migration to Latin America". Leiden University. Retrieved 18 January 2014.
Jump up ^ Axtell, James (September–October 1991). "The Columbian Mosaic in Colonial America". Humanities. 12 (5): 12–18. Archived from the original on 17 May 2008. Retrieved 8 October 2008.
Jump up ^ "Spain – People". Encyclopædia Britannica. 20 March 2013. Retrieved 18 January 2014.
Jump up ^ "Spain". Focus-migration.de. Retrieved 18 January 2014.
Jump up ^ "Bilbao, un ejemplo urbanístico para el mundo. El Correo". El Correo.
Jump up ^ "Azkuna: "El premio no es para mí, sino para los bilbaínos". El Correo". El Correo.
Jump up ^ "World Mayor: The 2012 results".
Jump up ^ "Áreas urbanas +50". Ministry of Public Works and Transport. 2013.
^ Jump up to: a b "World Urban Areas: Population & Density" (PDF). Demographia. Retrieved 10 August 2008.
Jump up ^ United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, World Urbanization Prospects (2007 revision), (United Nations, 2008), Table A.12. Data for 2007.
Jump up ^ United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, World Urbanization Prospects (2009 revision) Archived 25 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine., (United Nations, 2010), Table A.12. Data for 2007.
Jump up ^ Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Competitive Cities in the Global Economy, OECD Territorial Reviews, (OECD Publishing, 2006), Table 1.1
Jump up ^ "Rival nationalisms in a plurinational state: Spain, Catalonia and the Basque Country". Oxford University Press.
Jump up ^ "España, una nación de naciones" (PDF). University of Navarre.
Jump up ^ "Nacionalidades históricas". El País. Retrieved 9 May 2016.
Jump up ^ "Immigration statistics". BBC. 11 December 2006. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Diagnóstico social de la comunidad gitana en España" (PDF). Msc.es. Retrieved 21 May 2016.
Jump up ^ "Estimations" (JPG). Gfbv.it. Retrieved 21 May 2016.
Jump up ^ "The Situation of Roma in Spain" (PDF). Open Society Institute. 2002. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 December 2007. Retrieved 15 September 2010. The Spanish government estimates the number of Gitanos at a maximum of 650,000.
Jump up ^ Recent Migration of Roma in Europe, A study by Mr. Claude Cahn and Professor Elspeth Guild, page 87-8 (09.2010 figures)
Jump up ^ "The Situation of Roma in Spain" (PDF). Open Society Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2008. Retrieved 14 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Sephardim – Jewish Virtual Library by Rebecca Weiner
Jump up ^ "El regreso de los judíos sefardíes a España". euronewses.
Jump up ^ INE, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Financial crisis reveals vulnerability of Spain's immigrants – Feature". The Earth Times. 18 November 2009.
Jump up ^ "Avance del Padrón Municipal a 1 de enero de 2006. Datos provisionales" (PDF). Instituto Nacional de Estadística. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 July 2008. Retrieved 13 August 2008. and "Spain: Immigrants Welcome". Business Week. Retrieved 13 August 2008. and "Immigrants Fuel Europe's Civilization Clash". MSNBC. Archived from the original on 13 May 2008. Retrieved 13 August 2008. and "Spanish youth clash with immigrant gangs". International Herald Tribune. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Population in Europe in 2005" (PDF). Eurostat. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 August 2008. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Spain to increase immigration budget, 10 October 2007
Jump up ^ Spain's Immigration System Runs Amok, 17 September 2008
Jump up ^ Tremlett, Giles (9 May 2005). "Spain grants amnesty to 700,000 migrants". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 20 July 2009.
Jump up ^ "Population series from 1998". INE Spanish Statistical Institute. Archived from the original on 2 November 2007. Retrieved 14 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Europeans Favour Spain for Expat Jobs". News.bg. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Plan de Retorno Voluntario Archived 18 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Gobierno de España
Jump up ^ Spain's Jobs Crisis Leaves Immigrants Out of Work, The Wall Street Journal, 24 January 2009
^ Jump up to: a b 580.000 personas se van de España. El País. Edición Impresa. 8 October 2011
Jump up ^ Conversi, Daniele (2002). "The Smooth Transition: Spain's 1978 Constitution and the Nationalities Question" (PDF). National Identities, Vol 4, No. 3. Carfax Publishing, Inc. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 May 2008. Retrieved 28 January 2008.
Jump up ^ Preamble to the Constitution Cortes Generales (27 December 1978). "Spanish Constitution". Tribunal Constitucional de España. Archived from the original on 17 January 2012. Retrieved 28 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Third article. Cortes Generales (27 December 1978). "Spanish Constitution". Tribunal Constitucional de España. Archived from the original on 17 January 2012. Retrieved 28 January 2012.
Jump up ^ "CIA – The World Factbook – 5pain". Cia.gov. Retrieved 30 April 2011.
Jump up ^ "Junta General del Principado de Asturias". Junta General del Principado de Asturias. Archived from the original on 16 January 2009. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "El semanario alemán Stern retrata la cara más oscura de Mallorca" (in Spanish). eldiario.es. 9 August 2013. Retrieved 31 December 2014.
Jump up ^ La Ley Orgánica 2/2006. Retrieved 23 September 2009
Jump up ^ Ley Orgánica 8/2013. Retrieved 9 December 2013
Jump up ^ De la LGE a la LOMCE: Así son las siete leyes educativas españolas de la democracia. teinteresa.es
Jump up ^ World Health Organisation, World Health Staff, (2000), Haden, Angela; Campanini, Barbara, eds., The world health report 2000 – Health systems: improving performance (PDF), Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organisation, ISBN 92-4-156198-X
Jump up ^ "Health care in Spain: Beneficiairies". seg-social.es. Retrieved 24 September 2017.
Jump up ^ Ley 26/1992, Documento BOE-A-1992-24855, Agencia Estatal Boletín Oficial del Estado
Jump up ^ Ley 25/1992, Documento BOE-A-1992-24854, Agencia Estatal Boletín Oficial del Estado
Jump up ^ Ley 24/1992, Documento BOE-A-1992-24853, Agencia Estatal Boletín Oficial del Estado
Jump up ^ "WVS Database". World Values Survey. Institute for Comparative Survey Research. March 2015.
Jump up ^ "Gallup International Religiosity Index" (PDF). The Washington Post. WIN-Gallup International. April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Federación de Entidades Religiosas Evangélicas de España – FEREDE". Ferede.org. Archived from the original on 30 September 2011. Retrieved 4 September 2010.
Jump up ^ "Spain – LDS Newsroom". Lds.org. Archived from the original on 13 December 2007. Retrieved 4 September 2010.
Jump up ^ "Explotación estadística del censo de ciudadanos musulmanes en España referido a fecha 31/12/2012" (PDF). Unión de Comunidades Islámicas de España: 6–9. 2012.
Jump up ^ Kamen, Henry (1999). The Spanish Inquisition: A Historical Revision. Yale University Press. pp. 29–31.
Jump up ^ "Spain". UNESCO Culture Sector. Retrieved 14 September 2014.
Jump up ^ "Spain – Intangible Cultural Heritage". UNESCO Culture Sector. Retrieved 14 September 2014.
Jump up ^ Jordan, Barry; Morgan-Tamosunas, Rikki (1998). Contemporary spanish cinema. Manchester University Press.
Jump up ^ Cruz, Jo (1999). Edited by David R. Blanks and Michael Frassetto, ed. Western Views of Islam in Medieval and Early Modern Europe: Perception and Other. New York: Saint Martin's Press. p. 56.
Jump up ^ "Music Festivals, UK Festivals and London Festivals". Spoonfed.co.uk. Retrieved 1 November 2011.
Jump up ^ "The History of the Guitar in Spain". Linguatics.com. Retrieved 30 April 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b Richardson, Paul (19 August 2007). "Spain's perfect paella". The Times. London. Retrieved 6 August 2010.
Jump up ^ DiGregorio, Sarah (1 December 2009). "Spain Gain at Mercat Negre". The Village Voice. New York. Retrieved 6 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "Bank holidays in Spain". bank-holidays.com. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Further reading
Gates, David (2001). The Spanish Ulcer: A History of the Peninsular War. Da Capo Press. p. 20. ISBN 978-0-306-81083-1.
External links
Find more about
Spain
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity
"Spain". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
Spain from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Spain at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Spain from the BBC News
Key Development Forecasts for Spain from International Futures
Government
E-Government portal for Spain
Maps
 Wikimedia Atlas of Spain
 Geographic data related to Spain at OpenStreetMap
Tourism
Official tourism portal for Spain
[show]
Articles related to Spain
Flag of Spain.svgSpain portal Mediterranean Relief.jpgMediterranean portal Terra.pngGeography portal Europe green light.pngEurope portal Flag of Europe.svgEuropean Union portal Flag of NATO.svgNATO portal
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 133609710 LCCN: n79006971 ISNI: 0000 0001 2324 3505 GND: 4055964-6 SUDOC: 026376296 BNF: cb118635857 (data) HDS: 3372 NDL: 00571694 BNE: XX109717
Categories: SpainIberian PeninsulaLiberal democraciesMember states of NATOMember states of the Council of EuropeMember states of the European UnionMember states of the Union for the MediterraneanMember states of the United NationsRomance countries and territoriesSouthwestern European countriesSpanish monarchySpanish-speaking countries and territoriesCountries in Europe
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikinews
Wikiquote
Wikivoyage
Languages
Acèh
????????
????????
Afrikaans
Akan
Alemannisch
????
Ænglisc
??????
???????
Aragonés
?????
Armãneashti
Arpetan
Asturianu
Avañe'?
????
Aymar aru
Az?rbaycanca
??????
?????
Bân-lâm-gú
?????????
??????????
?????????? (???????????)?
???????
Bikol Central
Bislama
?????????
Boarisch
???????
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
??????
Català
???????
Cebuano
Ceština
Chamoru
Chavacano de Zamboanga
ChiShona
ChiTumbuka
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Davvisámegiella
Deitsch
Deutsch
??????????
Diné bizaad
Dolnoserbski
?????
Eesti
????????
Emiliàn e rumagnòl
??????
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
E?egbe
?????
Fiji Hindi
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Fulfulde
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gagauz
Gàidhlig
Galego
??
?????
???????
????????????
?????? ?????? / Gõychi Konknni
???/Hak-kâ-ngî
??????
???
Hausa
Hawai?i
???????
??????
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Igbo
Ilokano
????????????? ???????
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
??????/inuktitut
Iñupiak
????
IsiXhosa
IsiZulu
Íslenska
Italiano
?????
Basa Jawa
Kalaallisut
?????
Kapampangan
????????-???????
???????
Kaszëbsczi
???????
Kernowek
Kinyarwanda
Kirundi
Kiswahili
????
Kongo
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî
????????
Ladino
?????
???
???? ??????
Latgalu
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuviu
Ligure
Limburgs
Lingála
Livvinkarjala
La .lojban.
Lumbaart
Magyar
??????
??????????
Malagasy
??????
Malti
Maori
?????
?????????
????
????????
Bahasa Melayu
Baso Minangkabau
Mìng-de?ng-ng?¯
Mirandés
???????
??????
??????????
Nahuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
Nedersaksies
??????
????? ????
???
Napulitano
???????
Nordfriisk
Norfuk / Pitkern
Norsk
Norsk nynorsk
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
???? ?????
?????
Oromoo
O?zbekcha/???????
??????
????
Pangasinan
??????
Papiamentu
????
Patois
????? ????
?????????
Picard
Piemontèis
Tok Pisin
Plattdüütsch
Polski
???t?a??
Português
Qaraqalpaqsha
Qirimtatarca
Reo tahiti
Româna
Romani
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
??????????
???????
???? ????
Gagana Samoa
?????????
Sängö
Sardu
Scots
Seeltersk
Sesotho
Sesotho sa Leboa
Shqip
Sicilianu
?????
Simple English
????
SiSwati
Slovencina
Slovenšcina
?????????? / ??????????
Slunski
Soomaaliga
?????
Sranantongo
?????? / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / ??????????????
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
?????
Taqbaylit
Tarandíne
???????/tatarça
??????
Tetun
???
??????
Lea faka-Tonga
???
Tsetsêhestâhese
Tshivenda
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Twi
??????
??????????
????
???????? / Uyghurche
Vahcuengh
Vèneto
Vepsän kel’
Ti?ng Vi?t
Volapük
Võro
Walon
??
West-Vlams
Winaray
Wolof
??
Xitsonga
??????
Yorùbá
??
Zazaki
Zeêuws
Žemaiteška
??
??????
Kab?y?
Edit links
This page was last edited on 6 January 2018, at 13:30.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki



Romania
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Romania (disambiguation).
Coordinates: 46°N 25°E

Romania
România  (Romanian)
Flag of Romania
Flag
Coat of arms of Romania
Coat of arms
Anthem: De?teapta-te, române!
'"Awaken thee, Romanian!"

MENU0:00
Location of  Romania  (dark green)– in Europe  (green & dark grey)– in the European Union  (green)  –  [Legend]
Location of  Romania  (dark green)
– in Europe  (green & dark grey)
– in the European Union  (green)  –  [Legend]

Capital
and largest city	Bucharest
44°25'N 26°06'E
Official languages	Romanian[1]
Recognised minority
languages[2]	
Albanian Armenian Bulgarian Czech Croatian German Greek Italian Macedonian Hungarian Polish Romani Russian Rusyn Serbian Slovak Tatar Turkish Ukrainian Yiddish
Ethnic groups (2011[3])	
88.9% Romanians
6.1% Hungarians
3.0% Roma
0.2% Ukrainians
0.2% Germans
Demonym	Romanian
Government	Unitary semi-presidential
republic
• President
Klaus Iohannis
• Prime Minister
Mihai Tudose
Legislature	Parliament
• Upper house
Senate
• Lower house
Chamber of Deputies
Formation
• Kingdom of Dacia
168 BC
• Roman conquest
106
• Migration Period
275 – 10th century
• First Romanian polities
10th century – 1330
• Principality of Wallachia
1330
• Principality of Moldavia
1346
• Principality of Transylvania
1570
• First union under Michael the Brave
1600
• United Principalitiesa
24 January 1859
• Independence from
the Ottoman Empire
9 May 1877 / 1878b
• Kingdom of Romania
14 March 1881
• Great Unionc
1 December 1918d
Area
• Total
238,397 km2 (92,046 sq mi) (81st)
• Water (%)
3
Population
• 2017 estimate
19,638,000 Decrease[4] (59th)
• 2011 census
20,121,641[3] (58th)
• Density
84.4/km2 (218.6/sq mi) (117th)
GDP (PPP)	2018 estimate
• Total
$474.032 billion[5] (42nd)
• Per capita
$25,533 (61st)
GDP (nominal)	2018 estimate
• Total
$204.943 billion[5] (49th)
• Per capita
$11,817 (67th)
Gini (2013)	Steady 34[6]
medium
HDI (2015)	Increase 0.802[7]
very high · 50th
Currency	Romanian Leu (RON)
Time zone	EET (UTC+2)
• Summer (DST)
EEST (UTC+3)
Date format	dd.mm.yyyy (AD)
Drives on the	right
Calling code	+40
Patron saint	Saint Andrew
ISO 3166 code	RO
Internet TLD	.roe
The double election of Alexandru Ioan Cuza in Moldavia and Wallachia (respectively, 5 and 24 January 1859).
Independence proclaimed on 9 May 1877, internationally recognised in 1878.
The union of Romania with Bessarabia, Bukovina and Transylvania in 1918.
Monarchy was abolished on 30 December 1947 upon the proclamation of the People's Republic and was changed with the new constitution upon its adoption on 21 August 1965 as the Socialist Republic. The Communist regime fell on 22 December 1989, the new democratic government was installed on 20 May 1990 and the new post-communist constitution was adopted on 21 November 1991. Romania joined the European Union on 1 January 2007.
Also .eu, shared with other European Union member states.
Romania (/ro?'me?ni?/ (About this sound listen) roh-MAY-nee-?; Romanian: România Listeni[rom?'ni.a]) is a sovereign state located in Southeastern Europe. It borders the Black Sea, Bulgaria, Ukraine, Hungary, Serbia, and Moldova. It has an area of 238,397 square kilometres (92,046 sq mi) and a temperate-continental climate. With almost 20 million inhabitants, the country is the seventh most populous member state of the European Union. Its capital and largest city, Bucharest, is the sixth-largest city in the EU, with 1,883,425 inhabitants as of 2011.[8]

The River Danube, Europe's second-longest river, rises in Germany and flows in a general southeast direction for 2,857 km (1,775 mi), coursing through ten countries before emptying into Romania's Danube Delta. The Carpathian Mountains, which cross Romania from the north to the southwest, include Moldoveanu, at 2,544 m (8,346 ft).[9]

Modern Romania was formed in 1859 through a personal union of the Danubian Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia. The new state, officially named Romania since 1866, gained independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1877. At the end of World War I, Transylvania, Bukovina and Bessarabia united with the sovereign Kingdom of Romania. During World War II, Romania was an ally of Nazi Germany against the Soviet Union, fighting side by side with the Wehrmacht until 1944, when it joined the Allied powers and faced occupation by the Red Army forces. Romania lost several territories, of which Northern Transylvania was regained after the war. Following the war, Romania became a socialist republic and member of the Warsaw Pact. After the 1989 Revolution, Romania began a transition towards democracy and a capitalist market economy.

Romania is a developing country and one of the poorest in the European Union, ranking 50th in the Human Development Index,[10][11] although as of 2017 its economy is growing at an estimated annual rate of 5%, tied with Malta for the highest in the EU.[12] Following rapid economic growth in the early 2000s, Romania has an economy predominantly based on services, and is a producer and net exporter of machines and electric energy, featuring companies like Automobile Dacia and OMV Petrom. It has been a member of NATO since 2004, and part of the European Union since 2007. A strong majority of the population identify themselves as Eastern Orthodox Christians and are native speakers of Romanian, a Romance language. The cultural history of Romania is often referred to when dealing with influential artists, musicians, inventors, and sportspeople.

Contents  [hide] 
1	Etymology
1.1	Official names
2	History
2.1	Early history
2.2	Middle Ages
2.3	Independence and monarchy
2.4	World Wars and Greater Romania
2.5	Communism
2.6	Contemporary period
2.7	NATO and EU integration
3	Geography and climate
3.1	Climate
4	Governance
4.1	Foreign relations
4.2	Military
4.3	Administrative divisions
5	Economy
5.1	Infrastructure
5.2	Tourism
5.3	Science and technology
6	Demographics
6.1	Languages
6.2	Religion
6.3	Urbanization
6.4	Education
6.5	Healthcare
7	Culture
7.1	Arts and monuments
7.2	Holidays, traditions and cuisine
7.3	Sports
8	See also
9	Notes
10	References
11	Sources
11.1	Primary sources
11.2	Secondary sources
12	External links
12.1	Government
12.2	Culture and history links
Etymology
Main article: Name of Romania
Romania derives from the Latin romanus, meaning "citizen of Rome".[13] The first known use of the appellation was attested in the 16th century by Italian humanists travelling in Transylvania, Moldavia, and Wallachia.[14][15][16][17]


Neac?u's letter from 1521, the oldest surviving document written in Romanian.
The oldest known surviving document written in Romanian, a 1521 letter known as the "Letter of Neac?u from Câmpulung",[18] is also notable for including the first documented occurrence of the country's name: Wallachia is mentioned as ?eara Rumâneasca (old spelling for "The Romanian Land"; ?eara from the Latin terra, "land"; current spelling: ?ara Româneasca).

Two spelling forms: român and rumân were used interchangeably[a] until sociolinguistic developments in the late 17th century led to semantic differentiation of the two forms: rumân came to mean "bondsman", while român retained the original ethnolinguistic meaning.[19] After the abolition of serfdom in 1746, the word rumân gradually fell out of use and the spelling stabilised to the form român.[b] Tudor Vladimirescu, a revolutionary leader of the early 19th century, used the term Rumânia to refer exclusively to the principality of Wallachia."[20]

The use of the name Romania to refer to the common homeland of all Romanians—its modern-day meaning—was first documented in the early 19th century.[c] The name has been officially in use since 11 December 1861.[21]

In English, the name of the country was formerly spelt Rumania or Roumania.[22] Romania became the predominant spelling around 1975.[23] Romania is also the official English-language spelling used by the Romanian government.[24] A handful of other languages (including Italian, Hungarian, Portuguese, and Norwegian) have also switched to "o" like English, but most languages continue to prefer forms with u, e.g. French Roumanie, German and Swedish Rumänien, Spanish Rumanía, Polish Rumunia, and Russian ??????? (Rumyniya).

Official names
1859–1862: United Principalities
1862–1866: Romanian United Principalities or Romania
1866–1881: Romania
1881–1947: Kingdom of Romania or Romania
1947–1965: Romanian People's Republic (RPR) or Romania
1965–December 1989: Socialist Republic of Romania (RSR) or Romania
December 1989–present: Romania
History
Main article: History of Romania
Early history
Map of Roman Dacia
The newly established Roman province of Dacia Trajana and the lands temporarily incorporated into Moesia province in the 110s AD

Decebalus, king of Dacia, as depicted in Cartea omului matur (1919)
The human remains found in Pe?tera cu Oase ("The Cave with Bones"), radiocarbon dated as being from circa 40,000 years ago, represent the oldest known Homo sapiens in Europe.[25][26] The Neolithic-Age Cucuteni area in northeastern Romania was the western region of the earliest European civilization, known as the Cucuteni-Trypillian culture.[27] Also the earliest known salt works in the world is at Poiana Slatinei, near the village of Lunca in Romania; it was first used in the early Neolithic, around 6050 BC, by the Starcevo culture, and later by the Cucuteni-Trypillian culture in the Pre-Cucuteni period.[28] Evidence from this and other sites indicates that the Cucuteni-Trypillian culture extracted salt from salt-laden spring water through the process of briquetage.

Prior to the Roman conquest of Dacia, the territories between the Danube and Dniester rivers were inhabited by various Thracian peoples, including the Dacians and the Getae.[29] Herodotus, in his work "Histories", notes the religious difference between the Getae and other Thracians,[30] however, according to Strabo, the Dacians and the Getae spoke the same language.[29] Dio Cassius draws attention to the cultural similarities between the two people.[29] There is a scholarly dispute whether the Dacians and the Getae were the same people.[31][32]

Roman incursions under Emperor Trajan between 101–102 AD and 105–106 AD resulted in half of the Dacian kingdom becoming a province of the Roman Empire called "Dacia Felix". The Roman rule lasted for 165 years. During this period the province was fully integrated into the Roman Empire, and a sizeable part of the population were newcomers from other provinces.[33] The Roman colonists introduced the Latin language. According to followers of the continuity theory, the intense Romanization gave birth to the Proto-Romanian language.[34][35] The province was rich in ore deposits (especially gold and silver in places like Alburnus Maior). Roman troops pulled out of Dacia around 271 AD.[36][37] The territory was later invaded by various migrating peoples.[38][39][40][41]

Burebista, Decebalus and Trajan are considered the Romanians' forefathers in Romanian historiography.[42][43][44]

Middle Ages
Main articles: Origin of the Romanians, Romania in the Early Middle Ages, and Romania in the Middle Ages

The three principalities of Wallachia, Moldavia and Transylvania under Michael the Brave.
In the Middle Ages, Romanians lived in three principalities: Wallachia (Romanian: ?ara Româneasca – "The Romanian Land"), Moldavia (Romanian: Moldova) and in Transylvania.[45] The existence of independent Romanian voivodeships in Transylvania as early as the 9th century is mentioned in Gesta Hungarorum,[46] but by the 11th century, Transylvania had become a largely autonomous part of the Kingdom of Hungary.[47] In the other parts, many small local states with varying degrees of independence developed, but only under Basarab I and Bogdan I the larger principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia would emerge in the 14th century to fight the threat of the Ottoman Empire.[48][49]


Writ issued on 14 October 1465 by Radu cel Frumos, from his residence in Bucharest, indicating Ottoman victory.
By 1541, the entire Balkan peninsula and most of Hungary had been conquered and integrated into the Ottoman Empire. By contrast, Moldavia, Wallachia, and Transylvania, while under Ottoman suzerainty, preserved partial or full internal autonomy until the mid-19th century (Transylvania until 1711[50]). This period featured several prominent rulers such as: Stephen the Great, Vasile Lupu, Alexander the Good and Dimitrie Cantemir in Moldavia; Vlad the Impaler, Mircea the Elder, Matei Basarab, Neagoe Basarab and Constantin Brâncoveanu in Wallachia; and Gabriel Bethlen in the Principality of Transylvania, as well as John Hunyadi and Matthias Corvinus in Transylvania, while it was still a part of the Kingdom of Hungary.[51][52] In 1600, all three principalities were ruled simultaneously by the Wallachian prince Michael the Brave (Mihai Viteazul), who was considered, later on, the precursor of modern Romania and became a point of reference for nationalists, as well as a catalyst for achieving a single Romanian state.[53]

Independence and monarchy
Main articles: Early Modern Romania, National awakening of Romania, United Principalities, Romanian War of Independence, and Kingdom of Romania

Changes in Romania's territory since 1859.

King Carol I of Romania
During the period of the Austro-Hungarian rule in Transylvania and of Ottoman suzerainty over Wallachia and Moldavia, most Romanians were given few rights[54] in a territory where they formed the majority of the population.[55][56] Nationalistic themes became principal during the Wallachian uprising of 1821, and the 1848 revolutions in Wallachia and Moldavia. The flag adopted for Wallachia by the revolutionaries was a blue-yellow-red horizontal tricolour (with blue above, in line with the meaning "Liberty, Justice, Fraternity"),[57] while Romanian students in Paris hailed the new government with the same flag "as a symbol of union between Moldavians and Wallachians".[58][59] The same flag, with the tricolour being mounted vertically, would later be officially adopted as the national flag of Romania.[60]

After the failed 1848 revolutions not all the Great Powers supported the Romanians' expressed desire to officially unite in a single state.[61] But in the aftermath of the Crimean War, the electors in both Moldavia and Wallachia voted in 1859 for the same leader, Alexandru Ioan Cuza, as Domnitor ("ruling prince" in Romanian), and the two principalities became a personal union formally under the suzerainty of the Ottoman Empire.[62] Following a coup d'état in 1866, Cuza was exiled and replaced with Prince Carol I of Romania of the House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen. During the 1877–1878 Russo-Turkish War Romania fought on the Russian side,[63] and in the aftermath, it was recognized as an independent state both by the Ottoman Empire and the Great Powers by the Treaty of San Stefano and the Treaty of Berlin.[64][65] The new Kingdom of Romania underwent a period of stability and progress until 1914, and also acquired Southern Dobruja from Bulgaria after the Second Balkan War.[66]

World Wars and Greater Romania
Main articles: Romania during World War I, Greater Romania, and Romania in World War II

A 1917 British map showing territories with majority Romanian populations.

Romania's territorial losses in the summer of 1940. Of these territories, only Northern Transylvania was regained.

Romanian dictator Ion Antonescu meeting with Adolf Hitler in June 1941.
Romania remained neutral for the first two years of World War I. Following the secret Treaty of Bucharest, according to which Romania would acquire territories with a majority of Romanian population from Austria-Hungary, it joined the Entente Powers and declared war on 27 August 1916.[67] After initial advances the Romanian military campaign quickly turned disastrous for Romania as the Central Powers occupied two-thirds of the country within months, before reaching a stalemate in 1917. The October Revolution and Russian withdrawal from the War left Romania alone and surrounded, and a cease fire was negotiated at Foc?ani that December. Romania was occupied and a harsh peace treaty was signed in May 1918. In November, Romania reentered the conflict. Total military and civilian losses from 1916 to 1918, within contemporary borders, were estimated at 748,000.[68] After the war, the transfer of Bukovina from Austria was acknowledged by the 1919 Treaty of Saint Germain,[69] of Banat and Transylvania from Hungary by the 1920 Treaty of Trianon,[70] and of Bessarabia from Russian rule by the 1920 Treaty of Paris.[71] All cessations made to the Central Powers in the ceasefire and treaty were nullified and renounced.[72]

The following interwar period is referred as Greater Romania, as the country achieved its greatest territorial extent at that time (almost 300,000 km2 or 120,000 sq mi).[73] The application of radical agricultural reforms and the passing of a new constitution created a democratic framework and allowed for quick economic growth. With oil production of 7.2 million tons in 1937, Romania ranked second in Europe and seventh in the world.[74][75] and was Europe's second-largest food producer.[76] However, the early 1930s were marked by social unrest, high unemployment, and strikes, as there were over 25 separate governments throughout the decade.[citation needed] On several occasions in the last few years before World War II, the democratic parties were squeezed between conflicts with the fascist and chauvinistic Iron Guard and the authoritarian tendencies of King Carol II.[77]

During World War II, Romania tried again to remain neutral, but on 28 June 1940, it received a Soviet ultimatum with an implied threat of invasion in the event of non-compliance.[78] Again foreign powers created heavy pressure on Romania, by means of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact of non-aggression from 23 August 1939. As a result of it the Romanian government and the army were forced to retreat from Bessarabia as well as from northern Bukovina in order to avoid war with the Soviet Union.[79] The king was compelled to abdicate and appointed general Ion Antonescu as the new Prime Minister with full powers in ruling the state by royal decree.[80] Romania was prompted to join the Axis military campaign. Thereafter, southern Dobruja was ceded to Bulgaria, while Hungary received Northern Transylvania as result of an Axis powers' arbitration.[81]

The Antonescu fascist regime played a major role in The Holocaust in Romania,[82] and copied the Nazi policies of oppression and genocide of Jews and Roma, mainly in the Eastern territories reoccupied by the Romanians from the Soviet Union. In total between 280,000 and 380,000 Jews in Romania (including Bessarabia, Bukovina and the Transnistria Governorate) were killed during the war[83][84] and at least 11,000 Romanian Gypsies ("Roma") were also killed.[85] In August 1944, a coup d'état led by King Michael toppled Ion Antonescu and his regime. Antonescu was convicted of war crimes and executed on 1 June 1946.[86] 9 October is now the National Day of Commemorating the Holocaust in Romania.[87]

During the Antonescu fascist regime, Romanian contribution to Operation Barbarossa was enormous, with the Romanian Army of over 1.2 million men in the summer of 1941, fighting in numbers second only to Nazi Germany.[88] Romania was the main source of oil for the Third Reich,[89] and thus became the target of intense bombing by the Allies. Growing discontent among the population eventually peaked in August 1944 with King Michael's Coup, and the country switched sides to join the Allies. It is estimated that the coup shortened the war by as much as six months.[90] Even though the Romanian Army had suffered 170,000 casualties after switching sides,[91] Romania's role in the defeat of Nazi Germany was not recognized by the Paris Peace Conference of 1947,[92] as the Soviet Union annexed Bessarabia and other territories corresponding roughly to present-day Republic of Moldova, and Bulgaria retained Southern Dobruja, but Romania did regain Northern Transylvania from Hungary.

Communism
Main article: Socialist Republic of Romania

Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej was the communist leader of Romania from 1947 until his death in 1965
During the Soviet occupation of Romania, the Communist-dominated government called for new elections in 1946, which were fraudulently won, with a fabricated 70% majority of the vote.[93] Thus they rapidly established themselves as the dominant political force.[94] Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, a Communist party leader imprisoned in 1933, escaped in 1944 to become Romania's first Communist leader. In 1947 he and others forced King Michael I to abdicate and leave the country, and proclaimed Romania a people's republic.[95][96] Romania remained under the direct military occupation and economic control of the USSR until the late 1950s. During this period, Romania's vast natural resources were continuously drained by mixed Soviet-Romanian companies (SovRoms) set up for unilateral exploitative purposes.[97][98][99]

In 1948, the state began to nationalize private firms and to collectivize agriculture.[100] Until the early 1960s, the government severely curtailed political liberties and vigorously suppressed any dissent with the help of the Securitate (the Romanian secret police). During this period the regime launched several campaigns of purges in which numerous "enemies of the state" and "parasite elements" were targeted for different forms of punishment, such as deportation, internal exile and internment in forced labour camps and prisons, sometimes for life, as well as extrajudicial killing.[101] Nevertheless, anti-Communist resistance was one of the most long-lasting in the Eastern Bloc.[102] A 2006 Commission estimated the number of direct victims of the Communist repression at two million people.[103]


Nicolae Ceau?escu ruled Romania as its Communist leader from 1965 until 1989.

The Romanian Revolution in 1989 was one of the few violent revolutions in Europe that brought an end to Communist rule.
In 1965, Nicolae Ceau?escu came to power and started to conduct the foreign policy more independently from the Soviet Union. Thus, Communist Romania was the only Warsaw Pact country who refused to participate at the Soviet-led 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia (Ceau?escu even publicly condemned the action as "a big mistake, [and] a serious danger to peace in Europe and to the fate of Communism in the world"[104]); it was also the only Communist state to maintain diplomatic relations with Israel after 1967's Six-Day War; and established diplomatic relations with West Germany the same year.[105] At the same time, close ties with the Arab countries (and the PLO) allowed Romania to play a key role in the Israel–Egypt and Israel–PLO peace talks.[106]

As Romania's foreign debt sharply increased between 1977 and 1981 (from US$3 billion to $10 billion),[107] the influence of international financial organizations (such as the IMF and the World Bank) grew, gradually conflicting with Ceau?escu's autocratic rule. The latter eventually initiated a policy of total reimbursement of the foreign debt by imposing austerity steps that impoverished the population and exhausted the economy. The process succeeded in repaying all foreign government debt of Romania in 1989. At the same time, Ceau?escu greatly extended the authority of the Securitate secret police and imposed a severe cult of personality, which led to a dramatic decrease in the dictator's popularity and culminated in his overthrow and eventual execution, together with his wife, in the violent Romanian Revolution of December 1989 in which thousands were killed or injured. The charges for which they were executed were, among others, genocide by starvation.

Contemporary period
Main article: History of Romania since 1989
After the 1989 revolution, the National Salvation Front (NSF), led by Ion Iliescu, took partial multi-party democratic and free market measures.[108][109] In April 1990, a sit-in protest contesting the results of that year's legislative elections and accusing the NSF, including Iliescu, of being made up of former Communists and members of the Securitate — rapidly grew to become what was called the Golaniad. The peaceful demonstrations degenerated into violence, prompting the intervention of coal miners summoned by Iliescu. This episode has been documented widely by both local[110] and foreign media,[111] and is remembered as the June 1990 Mineriad.[112][113]

The subsequent disintegration of the Front produced several political parties, including most notably the Social Democratic Party and the Democratic Party. The former governed Romania from 1990 until 1996 through several coalitions and governments with Ion Iliescu as head of state. Since then, there have been several other democratic changes of government: in 1996 Emil Constantinescu was elected president, in 2000 Iliescu returned to power, while Traian Basescu was elected in 2004 and narrowly re-elected in 2009.[114]

In November 2014, Sibiu mayor Klaus Iohannis was elected president, unexpectedly defeating Prime Minister Victor Ponta, who had been in the lead in the opinion polls. This surprise victory is attributed by many to the Romanian diaspora, of which almost 50 percent voted for Iohannis in the first tour, compared to 16 percent for Ponta.[115]


Romania has seen the largest anti-government protests in its history in the first half of 2017.
Former President Traian Basescu (2004–2014) has twice been impeached by the Parliament of Romania (in 2007 and in 2012), the second time on the background of street protest earlier in the year. Both times a popular referendum was called. The second time, in the Romanian presidential impeachment referendum, 2012, more than 7 million voters (88% of participants)[116] voted to oust Basescu, compared to the 5.2 million voters who initially supported him in the Romanian presidential election, 2009. However the Constitutional Court of Romania, in a split decision, invalided the outcome of the referendum, stating the turnout (46.24% by official statistics) was too low.[117] Supporters of Basescu were called upon by him and his former party to not participate in the referendum, so that it would be invalidated due to insufficient turnout.[118]

The post-1989 period is also characterized by the fact that most of the former industrial and economic enterprises which were built and operated during the Communist period have been closed, mainly as a result of the policies of privatization of the post-1989 regimes.[119] According to Valentin Mândrasescu, a Romanian-language editor of the Voice of Russia, the national petroleum company Petrom has been sold to foreigners for significantly undervalued prices.[120][121] Furthermore, other major privatizations like that of Banca Comerciala a României are criticized by opponents for being detrimental to the Romanian people.[122]

Post-1989 regimes are also criticized for allowing foreign exploitations of mineral, rare metals and gold reserves at Ro?ia Montana,[123] as well as for permitting American multinational energy giant Chevron to prospect for shale gas using the hydraulic fracking technique which has been claimed to pollute the vast underground freshwater reserves in the affected areas. Both these actions have led to significant protests by the population in 2012–2014. In November 2015, Romania's prime minister Victor Ponta resigned as massive anti-corruption protests developed in the wake of the Colectiv nightclub fire.[124]

NATO and EU integration

Romania joined NATO in 2004 and hosted its 2008 summit in Bucharest.
After the end of the Cold War, Romania developed closer ties with Western Europe and the United States, eventually joining NATO in 2004, and hosting the 2008 summit in Bucharest.[125]


Romania joined the European Union in 2007 and signed the Treaty of Lisbon.
The country applied in June 1993 for membership in the European Union and became an Associated State of the EU in 1995, an Acceding Country in 2004, and a full member on 1 January 2007.[126]

During the 2000s, Romania enjoyed one of the highest economic growth rates in Europe and has been referred at times as "the Tiger of Eastern Europe".[127] This has been accompanied by a significant improvement in living standards as the country successfully reduced internal poverty and established a functional democratic state.[128][129] However, Romania's development suffered a major setback during the late-2000s recession leading to a large gross domestic product contraction and budget deficit in 2009.[130] This led to Romania borrowing from the International Monetary Fund.[131] The worsening economic conditions led to unrest and triggered a political crisis in 2012.[132]

Romania still faces problems related to infrastructure,[133] medical services,[134] education,[135] and corruption.[136] Near the end of 2013, The Economist reported Romania again enjoying 'booming' economic growth at 4.1% that year, with wages rising fast and a lower unemployment than in Britain. Economic growth accelerated in the midst of government liberalisations in opening up new sectors to competition and investment—most notably, energy and telecoms.[137] In 2016 the Human Development Index ranked Romania as a nation of "Very High Human Development".[138]

Following the experience of economic instability throughout the 1990s, and the implementation of a free travel agreement with the EU, a great number of Romanians emigrated to Western Europe and North America, with particularly large communities in Italy and Spain. In 2008, the Romanian diaspora was estimated to be at over two million people.[139] The cyclical nature of the world economy and economic disparities between Romania and advanced European economies has fueled further emigration from the country. The emigration has caused social changes in Romania, whereby the parents would leave for Western Europe to escape poverty and provide a better standard of living for their children, who have been left behind. Some children are left to be taken care of by grandparents and relatives; and some live alone, if the parents deem them to be reasonably self-sufficient.[140] Subsequently, the youth began to be called Euro-orphans.[141]

Geography and climate
Main article: Geography of Romania

Topographic map of Romania

Moldoveanu Peak, the highest mountain of Romania

The Rodna Mountains in Maramure? County

The Danube Delta
With an area of 238,391 square kilometres (92,043 sq mi), Romania is the largest country in Southeastern Europe and the twelfth-largest in Europe.[142] It lies between latitudes 43° and 49° N and longitudes 20° and 30° E.

The terrain is distributed roughly equally between mountains, hills, and plains.

The Carpathian Mountains dominate the centre of Romania, with 14 mountain ranges reaching above 2,000 m or 6,600 ft, the highest of which is Moldoveanu Peak at 2,544 m or 8,346 ft.[142] They are surrounded by the Moldavian and Transylvanian plateaus and Carpathian Basin and Wallachian plains.

About 47% of the country's land area is covered with natural and semi-natural ecosystems.[143] There are almost 10,000 km2 (3,900 sq mi) (about 5% of the total area) of protected areas in Romania covering 13 national parks and three biosphere reserves.[144]

The Danube river forms a large part of the border with Serbia and Bulgaria, and flows into the Black Sea, forming the Danube Delta, which is the second-largest and best-preserved delta in Europe, and also a biosphere reserve and a biodiversity World Heritage Site.[145] At 5,800 km2 (2,200 sq mi),[146] the Danube Delta is the largest continuous marshland in Europe,[147] and supports 1,688 different plant species alone.[148]

Romania has one of the largest areas of undisturbed forest in Europe, covering almost 27% of the territory.[149] Some 3,700 plant species have been identified in the country, from which to date 23 have been declared natural monuments, 74 missing, 39 endangered, 171 vulnerable, and 1,253 rare.[150]

The fauna consists of 33,792 species of animals, 33,085 invertebrate and 707 vertebrate,[150] with almost 400 unique species of mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians,[151] including about 50% of Europe's (excluding Russia) brown bears[152] and 20% of its wolves.[153]

Climate
Owing to its distance from open sea and position on the southeastern portion of the European continent, Romania has a climate that is temperate and continental, with four distinct seasons. The average annual temperature is 11 °C (52 °F) in the south and 8 °C (46 °F) in the north.[154] In summer, average maximum temperatures in Bucharest rise to 28 °C (82 °F), and temperatures over 35 °C (95 °F) are fairly common in the lower-lying areas of the country.[155] In winter, the average maximum temperature is below 2 °C (36 °F).[155] Precipitation is average, with over 750 mm (30 in) per year only on the highest western mountains, while around Bucharest it drops to around 600 mm (24 in).[156] There are some regional differences: in the western parts, such as Banat, the climate is milder and has some Mediterranean influences; the eastern part of the country has a more pronounced continental climate. In Dobruja, the Black Sea also exerts an influence over the region's climate.[157]


Romania map of Köppen climate classification, according with Clima României from the Administra?ia Na?ionala de Meteorologie, Bucharest 2008
Average daily maximum and minimum temperatures for the eight largest cities in Romania[158]
Location	July (°C)	July (°F)	January (°C)	January (°F)
Bucharest	28.8/15.6	84/60	1.5/-5.5	35/22
Cluj-Napoca	24.5/12.7	76/55	0.3/-6.5	33/20
Timi?oara	27.8/14.6	82/58	2.3/-4.8	36/23
Ia?i	26.8/15	80/59	-0.1/-6.9	32/20
Constan?a	25.9/18	79/64	3.7/-2.3	39/28
Craiova	28.5/15.7	83/60	1.5/-5.6	35/22
Bra?ov	24.2/11.4	76/53	-0.1/-9.3	32/15
Gala?i	27.9/16.2	82/61	1.1/–5.3	34/22
Governance
Main articles: Politics of Romania and Government of Romania
Romania
Coat of arms of Romania
This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
Romania
Constitution[show]
Government[show]
Parliament[show]
Judiciary[show]
Political parties[show]
Elections[show]
Administrative divisions[show]
Foreign relations[show]
Politicians[show]
Other countries Atlas
v t e
The Constitution of Romania is based on the Constitution of France's Fifth Republic and was approved in a national referendum on 8 December 1991, and amended in October 2003 to bring it into conformity with the EU legislation. The country is governed on the basis of a multi-party democratic system and the separation of powers between the legislative, executive and judicial branches. It is a semi-presidential republic where executive functions are held by both government and the president.[159] The latter is elected by popular vote for a maximum of two terms of five years and appoints the prime minister, who in turn appoints the Council of Ministers. The legislative branch of the government, collectively known as the Parliament (residing at the Palace of the Parliament), consists of two chambers (Senate and Chamber of Deputies) whose members are elected every four years by simple plurality.[160][161]

The justice system is independent of the other branches of government, and is made up of a hierarchical system of courts culminating in the High Court of Cassation and Justice, which is the supreme court of Romania.[162] There are also courts of appeal, county courts and local courts. The Romanian judicial system is strongly influenced by the French model, considering that it is based on civil law and is inquisitorial in nature. The Constitutional Court (Curtea Constitu?ionala) is responsible for judging the compliance of laws and other state regulations to the constitution, which is the fundamental law of the country and can only be amended through a public referendum.[160][163] The 2007 entry into the EU has been a significant influence on its domestic policy, and including judicial reforms, increased judicial cooperation with other member states, and measures to combat corruption.

Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of Romania

Klaus Iohannis, the current President of Romania since December 2014.
Since December 1989, Romania has pursued a policy of strengthening relations with the West in general, more specifically with the United States and the European Union albeit with its limited relations with Russia. It joined the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on 29 March 2004, the European Union (EU) on 1 January 2007, while it had joined the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank in 1972, and is a founding member of the World Trade Organization.[164]

The current government has stated its goal of strengthening ties with and helping other countries (in particular Moldova, Ukraine and Georgia) with the process of integration with the rest of the West.[165] Romania has also made clear since the late 1990s that it supports NATO and EU membership for the democratic former Soviet republics in Eastern Europe and the Caucasus.[165] Romania also declared its public support for Turkey, and Croatia joining the European Union.[165] Because it has a large Hungarian minority, Romania has also developed strong relations with Hungary. Romania opted on 1 January 2007, to adhere the Schengen Area, and its bid to join was approved by the European Parliament in June 2011, but was rejected by the EU Council in September 2011.

In December 2005, President Traian Basescu and United States Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice signed an agreement that would allow a U.S. military presence at several Romanian facilities primarily in the eastern part of the country.[166] In May 2009, Hillary Clinton, US Secretary of State, declared that "Romania is one of the most trustworthy and respectable partners of the USA."[167]

Relations with Moldova are a special case, considering that the two countries share the same language and a common history.[165] A movement for unification of Romania and Moldova appeared in the early 1990s after both countries achieved emancipation from communist rule,[168] but lost ground in the mid-1990s when a new Moldovan government pursued an agenda towards preserving a Moldovan republic independent of Romania.[169] After the 2009 protests in Moldova and subsequent removal of Communists from power, relations between the two countries have improved considerably.[170]

Military
Main articles: Romanian Armed Forces and Military history of Romania
The Romanian Armed Forces consist of Land, Air, and Naval Forces, and are led by a Commander-in-chief under the supervision of the Ministry of Defense, and by the president as the Supreme Commander during wartime. The Armed Forces consist of approximately 15,000 civilians and 75,000 are military personnel—45,800 for land, 13,250 for air, 6,800 for naval forces, and 8,800 in other fields.[171] The total defence spending in 2007 accounted for 2.05% of total national GDP, or approximately US$2.9 billion, with a total of $11 billion spent between 2006 and 2011 for modernization and acquisition of new equipment.[172]


Romanian soldiers in Afghanistan during a joint operation in 2003.
The Air Force currently operates modernized Soviet MiG-21 Lancer fighters which are due to be replaced by twelve F-16s, recently purchased.[173] The Air Force purchased seven new C-27J Spartan tactical airlifters,[174] while the Naval Forces acquired two modernized Type 22 frigates from the British Royal Navy.[175]

Romania has contributed troops to the international coalition in Afghanistan since 2002,[176] with a peak deployment of 1,600 troops in 2010.[177] Its combat mission in the country concluded in 2014.[178] Romanian troops participated in the occupation of Iraq, reaching a peak of 730 soldiers before being slowly drawn down to 350 soldiers. Romania terminated its mission in Iraq and withdrew its last troops on 24 July 2009, among the last countries to do so. The Regele Ferdinand frigate participated in the 2011 military intervention in Libya.[179]

In December 2011, the Romanian Senate unanimously adopted the draft law ratifying the Romania-United States agreement signed in September of the same year that would allow the establishment and operation of a US land-based ballistic missile defence system in Romania as part of NATO's efforts to build a continental missile shield.[180]

Administrative divisions
Main article: Administrative divisions of Romania
Romania is divided into 41 counties (jude?e, pronounced judets) and the municipality of Bucharest. Each county is administered by a county council, responsible for local affairs, as well as a prefect responsible for the administration of national affairs at the county level. The prefect is appointed by the central government but cannot be a member of any political party.[181] Each county is further subdivided into cities and communes, which have their own mayor and local council. There are a total of 319 cities and 2,686 communes in Romania.[182] A total of 103 of the larger cities have municipality statuses, which gives them greater administrative power over local affairs. The municipality of Bucharest is a special case as it enjoys a status on par to that of a county. It is further divided into six sectors and has a prefect, a general mayor (primar), and a general city council.[182]

The NUTS-3 (Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics) level divisions of European Union reflect Romania's administrative-territorial structure, and correspond to the 41 counties plus Bucharest.[183] The cities and communes correspond to the NUTS-5 level divisions, but there are no current NUTS-4 level divisions. The NUTS-1 (four macroregions) and NUTS-2[184] (eight development regions) divisions exist but have no administrative capacity, and are instead used for coordinating regional development projects and statistical purposes.[183]

Romanian Counties ABARAGBCBHBNBTBVBRBZCSCLCJCTCVDBDJGLGRGJHRHDILISIFMMMHMSNTOTPHSMSJSBSVTRTMTLVSVLVNB
Development region	Area (km2)	Population (2011)[185]	Most populous urban center*[186]
Nord-Vest	34,159	2,600,132	Cluj-Napoca (411,379)
Centru	34,082	2,360,805	Bra?ov (369,896)
Nord-Est	36,850	3,302,217	Ia?i (382,484)
Sud-Est	35,762	2,545,923	Constan?a (425,916)
Sud – Muntenia	34,489	3,136,446	Ploie?ti (276,279)
Bucure?ti – Ilfov	1,811	2,272,163	Bucharest (2,272,163)
Sud-Vest Oltenia	29,212	2,075,642	Craiova (356,544)
Vest	32,028	1,828,313	Timi?oara (384,809)
Economy
Main article: Economy of Romania
Further information: Agriculture in Romania and Industry of Romania

Dacia Duster concept at the Geneva Motor Show (2009).
In 2016, Romania had a GDP (PPP) of around $441.601 billion and a GDP per capita (PPP) of $22,348.[187] According to the World Bank, Romania is an upper-middle income country economy.[188] According to Eurostat, Romania's GDP per capita (PPS) was at 59% of the EU average in 2016, an increase from 41% in 2007 (the year of Romania's accession to the EU), making Romania one of the fastest growing economies in the EU.[189]

After 1989 the country experienced a decade of economic instability and decline, led in part by an obsolete industrial base and a lack of structural reform. From 2000 onward, however, the Romanian economy was transformed into one of relative macroeconomic stability, characterized by high growth, low unemployment and declining inflation. In 2006, according to the Romanian Statistics Office, GDP growth in real terms was recorded at 7.7%, one of the highest rates in Europe.[190] However, a recession following the global financial crisis of 2008–2009 forced the government to borrow externally, including an IMF €20bn bailout program.[191] GDP has been growing by over 2% each year since.[192] According to The World Bank, the GDP per capita purchasing power parity grew from $13,442 in 2007 to an estimated $22,124 in 2015.[193] Romania still has one of the lowest net average monthly wage in the EU of €540 in 2016,[194] and an inflation of -1.1% in 2016.[195] Unemployment in Romania is at 5.4% in 2017, which is very low compared to other EU countries.[193]


Romania is part of the EU single market.
Industrial output growth reached 6.5% year-on-year in February 2013, the highest in the EU-27.[196] The largest local companies include car maker Automobile Dacia, Petrom, Rompetrol, Ford Romania, Electrica, Romgaz, RCS & RDS and Banca Transilvania.[197] Exports have increased substantially in the past few years, with a 13% annual rise in exports in 2010. Romania's main exports are cars, software, clothing and textiles, industrial machinery, electrical and electronic equipment, metallurgic products, raw materials, military equipment, pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals, and agricultural products (fruits, vegetables, and flowers). Trade is mostly centered on the member states of the European Union, with Germany and Italy being the country's single largest trading partners. The account balance in 2012 was estimated to be -4.52% of the GDP.[198]

After a series of privatizations and reforms in the late 1990s and 2000s, government intervention in the Romanian economy is somewhat lower than in other European economies.[199] In 2005, the government replaced Romania's progressive tax system with a flat tax of 16% for both personal income and corporate profit, among the lowest rates in the European Union.[200] The economy is predominantly based on services, which account for 51% of GDP, even though industry and agriculture also have significant contributions, making up 36% and 13% of GDP, respectively. Additionally, 30% of the Romanian population was employed in 2006 in agriculture and primary production, one of the highest rates in Europe.[201]

Since 2000, Romania has attracted increasing amounts of foreign investment, becoming the single largest investment destination in Southeastern and Central Europe. Foreign direct investment was valued at €8.3 billion in 2006.[202] According to a 2011 World Bank report, Romania currently ranks 72nd out of 175 economies in the ease of doing business, scoring lower than other countries in the region such as the Czech Republic.[203] Additionally, a study in 2006 judged it to be the world's second-fastest economic reformer (after Georgia).[204]

Since 1867 the official currency has been the Romanian leu ("lion") and following a denomination in 2005, it has been valued at €0.2–0.3. After joining the EU in 2007, Romania is expected to adopt the Euro sometime around 2020.[205]

At 1 July 2015, Romanian's external debt was €90.59 billion.[206]

Infrastructure
Main articles: Transport in Romania and Energy in Romania

Romania's road network.

Graph Romania electricity supply mix 2015
According to the INSSE, Romania's total road network was estimated in 2015 at 86,080 kilometres (53,488 mi).[207] The World Bank estimates the railway network at 22,298 kilometres (13,855 mi) of track, the fourth-largest railroad network in Europe.[208] Rail transport experienced a dramatic decline after 1989, and was estimated at 99 million passenger journeys in 2004; but has experienced a recent (2013) revival due to infrastructure improvements and partial privatization of lines,[160] accounting for 45% of all passenger and freight movements in the country.[160] Bucharest Metro, the only underground railway system, was opened in 1979 and measures 61.41 km (38.16 mi) with an average ridership in 2007 of 600,000 passengers during the workweek.[209] There are sixteen international commercial airports in service today, with five of them (Henri Coanda International Airport, Aurel Vlaicu International Airport, Timi?oara International Airport, Constanta International Airport and Sibiu International Airport) being capable of handling wide-body aircraft. Over 9.2 million passengers flew through Bucharest's Henri Coanda International Airport in 2015.[210]

Romania is a net exporter of electrical energy and is 48th worldwide in terms of consumption of electric energy.[211][better source needed] Around a third of the produced energy comes from renewable sources, mostly as hydroelectric power.[212] In 2015, the main sources were coal (28%), hydroelectric (30%), nuclear (18%), and hydrocarbons (14%) .[213] It has one of the largest refining capacities in Eastern Europe, even though oil and natural gas production has been decreasing for more than a decade.[211] With one of the largest reserves of crude oil and shale gas in Europe,[211] it is among the most energy-independent countries in the European Union,[214] and is looking to further expand its nuclear power plant at Cernavoda.[215]

There were almost 18,3 million connections to the Internet in June 2014.[216] According to Bloomberg, in 2013 Romania ranked 5th in the world, and according to The Independent, it ranks number one in Europe at internet speeds,[217][218] with Timi?oara ranked among the highest in the world.[219]

Tourism

Bran Castle near Bra?ov, sometimes advertised as "Dracula's Castle", is a popular attraction for tourists.
Main article: Tourism in Romania
Tourism is a significant contributor to the Romanian economy, generating around 5% of GDP.[220] According to the World Travel and Tourism Council, Romania was estimated to have the fourth-fastest-growing travel and tourism total demand in the world, with an estimated potential growth of 8% per year from 2007 to 2016.[221] The number of tourists has been steadily rising, reaching 9.33 million foreign tourists in 2016, according to the Worldbank.[222] Tourism in Romania attracted €400 million in investments in 2005.[223]

More than 60% of the foreign visitors in 2007 were from other EU countries.[224] The popular summer attractions of Mamaia and other Black Sea Resorts attracted 1.3 million tourists in 2009.[225][226] Most popular skiing resorts are along the Valea Prahovei and in Poiana Bra?ov. Castles in Transylvanian cities such as Sibiu, Bra?ov, and Sighi?oara also attract a large number of tourists. Bran Castle, near Bra?ov, is one of the most famous attractions in Romania, drawing hundreds of thousands of tourists every year as it is often advertised as being Dracula's Castle.[227]

Rural tourism, focusing on folklore and traditions, has become an important alternative,[228] and is targeted to promote such sites as Bran and its Dracula's Castle, the Painted churches of Northern Moldavia, and the Wooden churches of Maramure?.[229] Other attractions include the Danube Delta, and the Sculptural Ensemble of Constantin Brâncu?i at Târgu Jiu.[230][231]

In 2014, Romania had 32,500 companies which were active in the hotel and restaurant industry, with a total turnover of EUR 2.6 billion.[232] More than 1.9 million foreign tourists visited Romania in 2014, 12% more than in 2013.[233] According to the country's National Statistics Institute, some 77% came from Europe (particularly from Germany, Italy and France), 12% from Asia, and less than 7% from North America.[233]

Science and technology
Main articles: Science and technology in Romania and List of Romanian inventors and discoverers

Coanda-1910 was an early aircraft with ducted fan propulsion.
Historically, Romanian researchers and inventors have made notable contributions to several fields. In the history of flight, Traian Vuia made the first airplane to take off on its own power[234] and Aurel Vlaicu built and flew some of the earliest successful aircraft, while Henri Coanda discovered the Coanda effect of fluidics. Victor Babe? discovered more than 50 types of bacteria; biologist Nicolae Paulescu discovered insulin, while Emil Palade, received the Nobel Prize for his contributions to cell biology. Lazar Edeleanu was the first chemist to synthesize amphetamine and he also invented the procedure of separating valuable petroleum components with selective solvents, while Costin Neni?escu developed numerous new classes of compounds in organic chemistry. Notable mathematicians include Spiru Haret, Grigore Moisil, and ?tefan Odobleja; physicists and inventors: ?erban ?i?eica, Alexandru Proca, and ?tefan Procopiu.

During the 1990s and 2000s, the development of research was hampered by several factors, including corruption, low funding and a considerable brain drain.[235] However, since the country's accession to the European Union, this has begun to change.[236] After being slashed by 50% in 2009 because of the global recession, R&D spending was increased by 44% in 2010 and now stands at $0.5 billion (1.5 billion lei).[237] In January 2011, the Parliament also passed a law that enforces "strict quality control on universities and introduces tough rules for funding evaluation and peer review".[238] The country has joined several major international organizations such as CERN and the European Space Agency.[239][240] Overall, the situation has been characterized as "rapidly improving", albeit from a low base.[241]

The nuclear physics facility of the European Union's proposed Extreme Light Infrastructure (ELI) laser will be built in Romania.[242] In early 2012, Romania launched its first satellite from the Centre Spatial Guyanais in French Guyana.[243] Starting December 2014, Romania is a co-owner of the International Space Station.[244]

Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Romania
See also: Minorities of Romania and Romanian diaspora
Historical population
Year	Pop.	±%
1866	4,424,961	—    
1887	5,500,000	+24.3%
1899	5,956,690	+8.3%
1912	7,234,919	+21.5%
1930	18,057,028	+149.6%
1939	19,934,000	+10.4%
1941	13,535,757	-32.1%
1948	15,872,624	+17.3%
1956	17,489,450	+10.2%
1966	19,103,163	+9.2%
1977	21,559,910	+12.9%
1992	22,760,449	+5.6%
2002	21,680,974	-4.7%
2011	20,121,641	-7.2%
2016 (est.)	19,474,952	-3.2%
Figures prior to 1948 do not reflect current borders.

Ethnic map of Romania based on 2011 census data.
According to the 2011 census, Romania's population is 20,121,641.[3] Like other countries in the region, its population is expected to gradually decline in the coming years as a result of sub-replacement fertility rates and negative net migration rate. In October 2011, Romanians made up 88.9% of the population. The largest ethnic minorities are the Hungarians, 6.1% of the population, and the Roma, 3.0% of the population.[d][245] Hungarians constitute a majority in the counties of Harghita and Covasna. Other minorities include Ukrainians, Germans, Turks, Lipovans, Aromanians, Tatars, and Serbs.[246] In 1930, there were 745,421 Germans in Romania,[247] but only about 36,000 remain today.[246] As of 2009, there were also approximately 133,000 immigrants living in Romania, primarily from Moldova and China.[128]

The total fertility rate (TFR) in 2015 was estimated at 1.33 children born per woman, which is below the replacement rate of 2.1, and one of the lowest in the world.[248] In 2014, 31.2% of births were to unmarried women.[249] The birth rate (9.49‰, 2012) is much lower than the mortality rate (11.84‰, 2012), resulting in a shrinking (-0.26% per year, 2012) and aging population (median age: 39.1, 2012), with approximately 14.9% of total population aged 65 years and over.[250][251][252] The life expectancy in 2015 was estimated at 74.92 years (71.46 years male, 78.59 years female).[248]

The number of Romanians and individuals with ancestors born in Romania living abroad is estimated at around 12 million.[139] After the Romanian Revolution of 1989, a significant number of Romanians emigrated to other European countries, North America or Australia.[253] For example, in 1990, 96,919 Romanians permanently settled abroad.[254]

Languages
Main article: Romanian language
The official language is Romanian, an Eastern Romance language similar to Aromanian, Megleno-Romanian, and Istro-Romanian, but sharing many features with other Romance languages such as Italian, French, Spanish and Portuguese. (The Romanian alphabet contains the same 26 letters of the Latin, plus 5 others, totaling 31.) Romanian is spoken as a first language by 85% of the population, while Hungarian and Vlax Romani are spoken by 6.2% and 1.2% of the population, respectively. There are 25,000 native German speakers, and 32,000 Turkish speakers in Romania, as well as almost 50,000 speakers of Ukrainian,[255] concentrated in some compact regions, near the border, where they form a majority.[256] According to the Constitution, local councils ensure linguistic rights to all minorities, with localities with ethnic minorities of over 20%, that minority's language can be used in the public administration, justice system, and education. Foreign citizens and stateless persons that live in Romania have access to justice and education in their own language.[257] English and French are the main foreign languages taught in schools.[258] In 2010, the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie identifies 4,756,100 French speakers in the country.[259] According to the 2012 Eurobarometer, English is spoken by 31% of Romanians, French is spoken by 17%, and Italian by 7%.[260]

Religion

The Ia?i Metropolitan Cathedral, founded in 1833, is the largest Orthodox church in Romania.
Religion in Romania (2011 census)
Religion			Percentage	
Eastern Orthodox	
?
81.0%
Roman Catholic	
?
4.3%
Reformed	
?
3.0%
Pentecostal	
?
1.8%
Greek Catholic	
?
0.7%
Baptist	
?
0.6%
Seventh-day Adventist	
?
0.4%
Other	
?
1.8%
Non-Religious	
?
0.2%
No data	
?
6.2%
Main articles: Religion in Romania and Romanian Orthodox Church
Romania is a secular state and has no state religion. An overwhelming majority of the population identify themselves as Christians. At the country's 2011 census, 81.0% of respondents identified as Orthodox Christians belonging to the Romanian Orthodox Church. Other denominations include Protestantism (6.2%), Roman Catholicism (4.3%), and Greek Catholicism (0.8%). From the remaining population, 195,569 people belong to other Christian denominations or have another religion, which includes 64,337 Muslims (mostly of Turkish and Tatar ethnicity) and 3,519 Jewish. Moreover, 39,660 people have no religion or are atheist, whilst the religion of the rest is unknown.[261]

The Romanian Orthodox Church is an autocephalous Eastern Orthodox Church in full communion with other Orthodox churches, with a Patriarch as its leader. It is the second-largest Orthodox Church in the world[citation needed], and unlike other Orthodox churches, it functions within a Latin culture and utilizes a Romance liturgical language.[262] Its canonical jurisdiction covers the territories of Romania and Moldova,[263] with dioceses for Romanians living in nearby Serbia and Hungary, as well as diaspora communities in Central and Western Europe, North America and Oceania.

Urbanization
Main articles: List of cities and towns in Romania and Metropolitan Areas in Romania
Although 54.0% of the population lived in urban areas in 2011,[3] this percentage has been declining since 1996.[264] Counties with over ? urban population are Hunedoara, Bra?ov and Constan?a, while with less than a third are Dâmbovi?a (30.06%) and Giurgiu and Teleorman.[3] Bucharest is the capital and the largest city in Romania, with a population of over 1.8 million in 2011. Its larger urban zone has a population of almost 2.2 million,[265] which are planned to be included into a metropolitan area up to 20 times the area of the city proper.[266][267][268] Another 19 cities have a population of over 100,000, with Cluj-Napoca and Timi?oara of slightly more than 300,000 inhabitants, Ia?i, Constan?a, Craiova and Bra?ov with over 250,000 inhabitants, and Gala?i and Ploie?ti with over 200,000 inhabitants.[186] Metropolitan areas have been constituted for most of these cities.

  v t e
Largest cities in Romania
2011 Census[269]
Rank	Name	County	Pop.	Rank	Name	County	Pop.	
Bucharest
Bucharest
Cluj-Napoca
Cluj-Napoca	1	Bucharest	Bucharest	1,883,425	11	Braila	Braila	180,302	Timi?oara
Timi?oara
Ia?i
Ia?i
2	Cluj-Napoca	Cluj	324,576	12	Arad	Arad	159,704
3	Timi?oara	Timi?	319,279	13	Pite?ti	Arge?	155,383
4	Ia?i	Ia?i	290,422	14	Sibiu	Sibiu	147,245
5	Constan?a	Constan?a	283,872	15	Bacau	Bacau	144,307
6	Craiova	Dolj	269,506	16	Târgu Mure?	Mure?	134,290
7	Bra?ov	Bra?ov	253,200	17	Baia Mare	Maramure?	123,738
8	Gala?i	Gala?i	249,342	18	Buzau	Buzau	115,494
9	Ploie?ti	Prahova	209,945	19	Boto?ani	Boto?ani	106,847
10	Oradea	Bihor	196,367	20	Satu Mare	Satu Mare	102,441
Education
Main article: Romanian educational system

University of Bucharest was opened in 1864.

Illiteracy rate by county (2011). Cooler colors indicate a lower rate of illiteracy, and warmer colors indicate a higher rate of illiteracy. The national average is 1.22%.
Since the Romanian Revolution of 1989, the Romanian educational system has been in a continuous process of reform that has received mixed criticism.[270] In 2004, some 4.4 million of the population were enrolled in school. Out of these, 650,000 in kindergarten (3–6 years), 3.11 million in primary and secondary level, and 650,000 in tertiary level (universities).[271] In the same year, the adult literacy rate was 97.3% (45th worldwide), while the combined gross enrollment ratio for primary, secondary and tertiary schools was 75% (52nd worldwide).[272] Kindergarten is optional between 3 and 6 years. Since 2012, compulsory schooling starts at age 6 with the "preparatory school year" (clasa pregatitoare)[273] and is compulsory until tenth grade.[274] Primary and secondary education is divided into 12 or 13 grades. There also exists a semi-legal, informal private tutoring system used mostly during secondary school, which has prospered during the Communist regime.[275]

Higher education is aligned with the European higher education area. The results of the PISA assessment study in schools for the year 2012 placed Romania on the 45th rank out of 65 participant countries[276] and in 2016 the Romanian government released statistics showing 42% of 15-year-olds are functionally illiterate in reading.[277] though Romania often wins medals in the mathematical olympiads[278][279][280] and not only. Alexandru Ioan Cuza University of Ia?i, Babe?-Bolyai University of Cluj-Napoca, University of Bucharest, and West University of Timi?oara have been included in the QS World University Rankings' top 800.[281]

Healthcare
Main article: Healthcare in Romania
Romania has a universal health care system, and total health expenditures by the government are roughly 5% of the GDP.[282] It covers medical examinations, any surgical interventions, and any post-operator medical care, and provides free or subsidized medicine for a range of diseases. The state is obliged to fund public hospitals and clinics. The most common causes of death are cardiovascular diseases and cancer. Transmissible diseases, such as tuberculosis, syphilis or viral hepatitis, are quite common by European standards.[283] In 2010, Romania had 428 state and 25 private hospitals,[284] with 6.2 hospital beds per 1,000 people,[285] and over 200,000 medical staff, including over 52,000 doctors.[286] As of 2013, the emigration rate of doctors was 9%, higher than the European average of 2.5%.[287]

Culture

Sibiu was the European Capital of Culture in 2007.

Mihai Eminescu is the national poet of Romania and Moldova.

George Enescu was an influential Romanian composer, violinist, pianist, conductor, and teacher

Angela Gheorghiu, one of the world's foremost sopranos.
Main articles: Culture of Romania and National symbols of Romania
Arts and monuments
Main articles: Romanian literature, Cinema of Romania, Music of Romania, and List of World Heritage Sites in Romania
See also: List of films shot in Romania
The topic of the origin of the Romanians began to be discussed by the end of the 18th century among the Transylvanian School scholars.[288] Several writers rose to prominence in the 19th century, including George Co?buc, Ioan Slavici, Mihail Kogalniceanu, Vasile Alecsandri, Nicolae Balcescu, Ion Luca Caragiale, Ion Creanga, and Mihai Eminescu, the later being considered the greatest and most influential Romanian poet, particularly for the poem Luceafarul.[289] In the 20th century, Romanian artists reached international acclaim, including Tristan Tzara, Marcel Janco,[290] Mircea Eliade, Nicolae Grigorescu, Marin Preda, Liviu Rebreanu,[291] Eugène Ionesco, Emil Cioran, and Constantin Brâncu?i. The latter has a sculptural ensemble in Târgu Jiu, while his sculpture Bird in Space, was auctioned in 2005 for $27.5 million.[292][293] Romanian-born Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1986, while writer Herta Müller received the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2009.

Prominent Romanian painters include Nicolae Grigorescu, ?tefan Luchian, Ion Andreescu Nicolae Tonitza and Theodor Aman. Notable Romanian classical composers of the 19th and 20th centuries include Ciprian Porumbescu, Anton Pann, Eduard Caudella, Mihail Jora, Dinu Lipatti and especially George Enescu. The annual George Enescu Festival is held in Bucharest in honor of the 20th century emponymous composer.[294] Contemporary musicians like Angela Gheorghiu, Gheorghe Zamfir,[295][296] Inna,[297] Alexandra Stan[298] and many others have achieved various levels of international acclaim. At the Eurovision Song Contest Romanian singers have achieved third place in 2005 and 2010.[299]

In cinema, several movies of the Romanian New Wave have achieved international acclaim. At the Cannes Film Festival, 4 Months, 3 Weeks and 2 Days by Cristian Mungiu won Palme d'Or in 2007.[300] At the Berlin International Film Festival, Child's Pose by Calin Peter Netzer won the Golden Bear in 2013.[301]

The list of World Heritage Sites includes six cultural sites located within Romania, including eight Painted churches of northern Moldavia, eight Wooden Churches of Maramure?, seven Villages with fortified churches in Transylvania, the Horezu Monastery, and the Historic Centre of Sighi?oara. [302] The city of Sibiu, with its Brukenthal National Museum, was selected as the 2007 European Capital of Culture.[303] Multiple castles exist in Romania, including popular tourist attractions of Pele? Castle,[304] Corvin Castle, and "Dracula's Castle".[305]

Holidays, traditions and cuisine
See also: Romanian dress, Romanian folklore, and Romanian cuisine
There are 12 non-working public holidays, including the Great Union Day, celebrated on 1 December in commemoration of the 1918 union of Transylvania with Romania.[306] Winter holidays include the Christmas festivities and the New Year during which, various unique folklore dances and games are common: plugu?orul, sorcova, ursul, and capra.[307][308] The traditional Romanian dress that otherwise has largely fallen out of use during the 20th century, is a popular ceremonial vestment worn on these festivities, especially in the rural areas.[309] Sacrifices of live pigs during Christmas and lambs during Easter has required a special derogation from EU law after 2007.[310] During Easter, painted eggs are very common, while on 1 March features mar?i?or gifting, a tradition likely of Thracian origin.[311]

Romanian cuisine shares some similarities with other Balkan cuisines such as Greek, Bulgarian and Turkish cuisine.[312] Ciorba includes a wide range of sour soups, while mititei, mamaliga (similar to polenta), and sarmale are featured commonly in main courses.[313] Pork, chicken and beef are the preferred meats, but lamb and fish are also popular.[314] [315] Certain traditional recipes are made in direct connection with the holidays: chiftele, toba and tochitura at Christmas; drob, pasca and cozonac at Easter and other Romanian holidays.[316] ?uica is a strong plum brandy reaching a 70% alcohol content which is the country's traditional alcoholic beverage, taking as much as 75% of the national crop (Romania is one of the largest plum producers in the world).[317][318] Traditional alcoholic beverages also include wine, rachiu, palinca and vi?inata, but beer consumption has increased dramatically over the recent years.[319]

Sports
Main article: Sports in Romania

Simona Halep is currently ranked world No. 1 in singles by the Women's Tennis Association (WTA).
Association football (soccer) is the most popular sport in Romania with over 234,000 registered players as of 2010.[320] The governing body is the Romanian Football Federation, which belongs to UEFA. The Romania national football team has taken part seven times in the FIFA World Cup games and had its most successful period during the 1990s, when they reached the quarterfinals of the 1994 FIFA World Cup and was ranked third by FIFA in 1997.[321] The core player of this "Golden Generation" was Gheorghe Hagi, who was nicknamed "the Maradona of the Carpathians."[322][323] Other successful players include Nicolae Dobrin, Dudu Georgescu, Florea Dumitrache, Li?a Dumitru, Ilie Balaci, Lo?i Bölöni, Costica ?tefanescu, Cornel Dinu or Gheorghe Popescu, and most recently Adrian Mutu, Cristian Chivu, Dan Petrescu or Cosmin Contra.

The most successful club is Steaua Bucure?ti, who were the first Eastern European team to win the European Champions Cup in 1986, and were runners-up in 1989. Dinamo Bucure?ti reached the European Champions' Cup semifinal in 1984 and the Cup Winners' Cup semifinal in 1990. Other important Romanian football clubs are Rapid Bucure?ti, UTA Arad, Universitatea Craiova, CFR Cluj and Petrolul Ploie?ti.


Cristina Neagu is the only female handball player in history to win three IHF World Player of the Year awards.
Tennis is the second-most-popular sport, with over 15,000 registered players.[324] Romania reached the Davis Cup finals three times (1969, 1971, 1972). The tennis player Ilie Nastase won several Grand Slam titles, and was the first player to be ranked as number 1 by ATP between 1973 and 1974. Virginia Ruzici won the French Open in 1978, and was runner-up in 1980, Simona Halep played the final in 2014 and 2017 and is currently ranked 1st by the WTA.[325] The Romanian duo Horia Tecau and Florin Mergea won the doubles silver medal at the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.[326]

Other popular team sports are team handball,[324] basketball[327] and rugby union. Both the men's and women's handball national teams are multiple world champions. On 13 January 2010, Cristina Neagu became the first Romanian in handball to win the IHF World Player of the Year award.[328] Basketball is widely enjoyed, especially by the youth.[327] Gheorghe Mure?an was one of the two tallest players to ever play in the NBA. In 2016, Romania was chosen as a host for the 2017 EuroBasket. The rugby national team has competed in every Rugby World Cup. Popular individual sports include athletics, chess, judo, dancesport, table tennis and combat sports (Lucian Bute, Leonard Dorin Doroftei, Mihai Leu aka Michael Loewe, Daniel Ghi?a, Benjamin Adegbuyi, Andrei Stoica, etc.).[324] While it has a limited popularity nowadays, oina is a traditional Romanian sporting game similar to baseball that has been continuously practiced since at least the 14th century.[329]

Romania participated in the Olympic Games for the first time in 1900 and has taken part in 21 of the 28 summer games. It has been one of the more successful countries at the Summer Olympic Games, with a total of 307 medals won throughout the years, of which 89 gold ones, ranking 15th overall, and second (behind neighbour Hungary) of the nations that have never hosted the game. It participated at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles in defiance of a Warsaw Pact boycott and finished second in gold medals (20) and third in total medal count (53).[330] Almost a quarter of all the medals and 25 of the gold ones were won in gymnastics, with Nadia Comaneci becoming the first gymnast ever to score a perfect ten in an Olympic event at the 1976 Summer Olympics.[331] Romanian competitors have won gold medals in other Olympic sports: rowing, athletics, canoeing, wrestling, shooting, fencing, swimming, weightlifting, boxing, and judo. At the Winter Olympic Games, Romania has won only a bronze medal in bobsleigh at the 1968 Winter Olympics.

See also
Index of Romania-related articles
Outline of Romania
 Romania – Wikipedia book
Notes
Jump up ^ "am scris aceste sfente car?i de înva?aturi, sa fie popilor rumânesti ... sa în?eleaga to?i oamenii cine-s rumâni cre?tini" "Întrebare cre?tineasca" (1559), Bibliografia româneasca veche, IV, 1944, p. 6.
"... ca vazum cum toate limbile au ?i înfluresc întru cuvintele slavite a lui Dumnezeu numai noi românii pre limba nu avem. Pentru aceia cu mare munca scoasem de limba jidoveasca si greceasca si srâbeasca pre limba româneasca 5 car?i ale lui Moisi prorocul si patru car?i ?i le daruim voo fra?i rumâni ?i le-au scris în cheltuiala multa ... ?i le-au daruit voo fra?ilor români, ... ?i le-au scris voo fra?ilor români" Palia de la Ora?tie (1581–1582), Bucure?ti, 1968.
În ?ara Ardealului nu lacuiesc numai unguri, ce ?i sa?i peste seama de mul?i ?i români peste tot locul ..., Grigore Ureche, Letopise?ul ?arii Moldovei, p. 133–134.
Jump up ^ In his literary testament Ienachi?a Vacarescu writes: "Urma?ilor mei Vacare?ti!/Las voua mo?tenire:/Cre?terea limbei române?ti/?-a patriei cinstire."
In the "Istoria faptelor lui Mavroghene-Voda ?i a razmeri?ei din timpul lui pe la 1790" a Pitar Hristache writes: "Încep dupa-a mea ideie/Cu vreo câteva condeie/Povestea mavrogheneasca/Dela ?ara Româneasca.
Jump up ^ In 1816, the Greek scholar Dimitrie Daniel Philippide published in Leipzig his work The History of Romania, followed by The Geography of Romania.
On the tombstone of Gheorghe Lazar in Avrig (built in 1823) there is the inscription: "Precum Hristos pe Lazar din mor?i a înviat/A?a tu România din somn ai de?teptat."
Jump up ^ 2002 census data, based on population by ethnicity Archived 24 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine., gave a total of 535,250 Roma in Romania. Many ethnicities are not recorded, as they do not have ID cards Archived 15 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine.. International sources give higher figures than the official census (e.g., UNDP's Regional Bureau for Europe, World Bank, "International Association for Official Statistics" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 February 2008.
References
Jump up ^ "Constitution of Romania". Cdep.ro. Archived from the original on 7 September 2017. Retrieved 2 October 2013.
Jump up ^ "Reservations and Declarations for Treaty No.148 – European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages". Council of Europe. Council of Europe. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 3 December 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e "Romanian 2011 census (final results)" (PDF) (in Romanian). INSSE. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 July 2013. Retrieved 28 August 2012.
Jump up ^ "Annual official estimate" Archived 30 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine..(PDF) 2017 Revision
^ Jump up to: a b "Romania". International Monetary Fund. Archived from the original on 3 January 2018. Retrieved 8 December 2017.
Jump up ^ "Gini coefficient of equivalised disposable income (source: SILC)". Eurostat Data Explorer. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 8 February 2015.
Jump up ^ "2016 Human Development Report Romania" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2016. pp. 2–3. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 March 2017. Retrieved 22 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 November 2014. Retrieved 28 September 2014.
Jump up ^ "Romania Geography". aboutromania.com. Archived from the original on 28 March 2015. Retrieved 4 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 25 April 2017. Retrieved 24 April 2017.
Jump up ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 24 September 2017.
Jump up ^ ""Country Comparison : GDP - Real Growth Rate", CIA World Factbook, accessed 26 July 2017". Cia.gov. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017. Retrieved 26 July 2017.
Jump up ^ "Explanatory Dictionary of the Romanian Language, 1998; New Explanatory Dictionary of the Romanian Language, 2002" (in Romanian). Dexonline.ro. Archived from the original on 12 March 2008. Retrieved 25 September 2010.
Jump up ^ Verres, Andréas. Acta et Epistolae. I. p. 243. nunc se Romanos vocant
Jump up ^ Cl. Isopescu (1929). "Notizie intorno ai romeni nella letteratura geografica italiana del Cinquecento". Bulletin de la Section Historique. XVI: 1–90. ... si dimandano in lingua loro Romei ... se alcuno dimanda se sano parlare in la lingua valacca, dicono a questo in questo modo: Sti Rominest ? Che vol dire: Sai tu Romano, ...
Jump up ^ Holban, Maria (1983). Calatori straini despre ?arile Române (in Romanian). II. Ed. ?tiin?ifica ?i Enciclopedica. pp. 158–161. Anzi essi si chiamano romanesci, e vogliono molti che erano mandati quì quei che erano dannati a cavar metalli ...
Jump up ^ Cernovodeanu, Paul (1960). Voyage fait par moy, Pierre Lescalopier l'an 1574 de Venise a Constantinople, fol 48. Studii ?i materiale de istorie medievala (in Romanian). IV. p. 444. Tout ce pays la Wallachie et Moldavie et la plus part de la Transilvanie a eté peuplé des colonies romaines du temps de Traian l'empereur ... Ceux du pays se disent vrais successeurs des Romains et nomment leur parler romanechte, c'est-à-dire romain ...
Jump up ^ Ion Rotaru, Literatura româna veche, "The Letter of Neac?u from Câmpulung" Archived 9 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine., Bucure?ti, 1981, pp. 62–65
Jump up ^ Brezeanu, Stelian (1999). Romanitatea Orientala în Evul Mediu. Bucharest: Editura All Educational. pp. 229–246.
Jump up ^ Goina, Calin. How the State Shaped the Nation: an Essay on the Making of the Romanian Nation Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine. in Regio – Minorities, Politics, Society.
Jump up ^ "Wallachia and Moldavia, 1859–61". Archived from the original on 9 June 2007. Retrieved 5 January 2008.
Jump up ^ See, for example, "Rumania: Remarkable Common Ground" Archived 31 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine., The New York Times (December 21, 1989).
Jump up ^ See the Google Ngrams for Romania, Rumania, and Roumania.
Jump up ^ "General principles" (in Romanian). cdep.ro. Archived from the original on 7 September 2017. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
Jump up ^ Europe Before Rome: A Site-by-Site Tour of the Stone, Bronze, and Iron Ages (T. Douglas Price) [1] Archived 6 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Zilhão, João (2006). "Neanderthals and Moderns Mixed and It Matters". Evolutionary Anthropology. 15 (5): 183–195. doi:10.1002/evan.20110.
Jump up ^ John Noble Wilford (1 December 2009). "A Lost European Culture, Pulled From Obscurity". The New York Times (30 November 2009). Archived from the original on 31 December 2016.
Jump up ^ Gibbs, Patrick. "Antiquity Vol 79 No 306 December 2005 The earliest salt production in the world: an early Neolithic exploitation in Poiana Slatinei-Lunca, Romania Olivier Weller & Gheorghe Dumitroaia". Antiquity.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 12 October 2012.
^ Jump up to: a b c Hitchins 2014, p. 7.
Jump up ^ Herodotus. Histories, 4.93–4.97.
Jump up ^ The Cambridge Ancient History (Volume 10) (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. 1996. J. J. Wilkes mentions "the Getae of the Dobrudja, who were akin to the Dacians" (p. 562)
Jump up ^ Mócsy, András (1974). Pannonia and Upper Moesia. Routledge and Kegan Paul. ISBN 0-7100-7714-9. See p. 364, n. 41: "If there is any justification for dividing the Thracian ethnic group, then, unlike V. Georgiev who suggests splitting it into the Thraco-Getae and the Daco-Mysi, I consider a division into the Thraco-Mysi and the Daco-Getae the more likely."
Jump up ^ Hitchins 2014, pp. 13–14.
Jump up ^ Matley, Ian (1970). Romania; a Profile. Praeger. p. 85.
Jump up ^ Giurescu, Constantin C. (1972). The Making of the Romanian People and Language. Bucharest: Meridiane Publishing House. pp. 43, 98–101, 141.
Jump up ^ Eutropius, Abridgment of Roman History BOOK IX.
Jump up ^ Watkins, Thayer. "The Economic History of the Western Roman Empire". Archived from the original on 17 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008. The Emperor Aurelian recognized the realities of the military situation in Dacia and, around 271 AD., withdrew Roman troops from Dacia, leaving it to the Goths. The Lower Danube once again became the northern frontier of the Roman Empire in Eastern Europe
Jump up ^ Jordanes (551). Getica, sive, De Origine Actibusque Gothorum. Constantinople. Archived from the original on 7 October 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Iliescu, Vl.; Paschale, Chronicon (1970). Fontes Historiae Daco-Romanae. II. Bucure?ti. pp. 363, 587.
Jump up ^ Teodor, Dan Gh. (1995). Istoria României de la începuturi pâna în secolul al VIII-lea. 2. Bucure?ti. pp. 294–325.
Jump up ^ Constantine VII, Porphyrogenitus (950). Constantine Porphyrogenitus De Administrando Imperio. Constantinople. Archived from the original on 23 October 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Lup?a, Cristian (1 March 2008). "Regele Decebal" (in Romanian). Lumea-Copiilor. Archived from the original on 19 April 2015. Retrieved 13 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Împaratul Traian, stramo?ul uitat" (in Romanian). Adevarul. 4 July 2013. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 13 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mitul stramo?ilor în "epopeea na?ionala": Dacii, Columna ?i Burebista" (in Romanian). Realitatea TV. 13 April 2015. Archived from the original on 21 July 2015. Retrieved 13 April 2015.
Jump up ^ Pop, Ioan-Aurel (Winter 2001). "The Romanians' Identity in the 16th Century According to Italian Authors" (PDF). Transylvanian Review. Romanian Cultural Foundation. 10 (4): 3. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 October 2014.
Jump up ^ "Gesta Hungarorum, the chronicle of Bele Regis Notarius". Scribd.com. Archived from the original on 16 September 2010. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ Makkai, László (2001). Köpeczi, Béla, ed. "History of Transylvania: III. Transylvania in the Medieval Hungarian Kingdom (896–1526)". New York: Institute of History of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Columbia University Press. Archived from the original on 10 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ ?tefanescu, ?tefan (1991). Istoria medie a României. I. Bucharest. p. 114.
Jump up ^ Predescu, Lucian (1940). Enciclopedia Cugetarea.
Jump up ^ Várkonyi, Ágnes R. (2001). "Columbia University Press". In Köpeczi, Béla. History of Transylvania: VI. The Last Decades of the Independent Principality (1660–1711). 2. New York: Institute of History of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. Archived from the original on 30 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ István, Vásáry. "Cumans and Tatars". cambridge.org. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
Jump up ^ Copy of Domnitori Romani. Archived from the original on 10 April 2015. Retrieved 5 April 2015.
Jump up ^ Giurescu, p. 211–13. Giurescu, Constantin C. (2007) [1935]. Istoria Românilor (in Romanian). Bucharest: Editura All.
Jump up ^ David Prodan, Supplex Libellus Valachorum, Bucharest, 1948.
Jump up ^ Kocsis, Karoly; Kocsis-Hodosi, Eszter (1999). Ethnic structure of the population on the present territory of Transylvania (1880–1992). Archived from the original on 22 February 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Kocsis, Karoly; Kocsis-Hodosi, Eszter (2001). Ethnic Geography of the Hungarian Minorities in the Carpathian Basin. Simon Publications. p. 102. ISBN 1-931313-75-X.
Jump up ^ Gazeta de Transilvania, year XI, no. 34 of 26 April 1848, p. 140.
Jump up ^ Dogaru (1978), p. 862.
Jump up ^ Cazani?teanu (1967), p. 36.
Jump up ^ Nasturel (1900/1901), p. 257. Nasturel, Petre Vasiliu, Steagul, stema româna, însemnele domne?ti, trofee (The Romanian flag [and] coat of arms; the princely insignias [and] trophies), Bucharest, 1903.
Jump up ^ The establishment of the Balkan national states, 1804–1920. Books.google.com. Archived from the original on 26 June 2014. Retrieved 28 March 2012.
Jump up ^ Bobango, Gerald J (1979). The emergence of the Romanian national State. New York: Boulder. ISBN 978-0-914710-51-6.
Jump up ^ "San Stefano Preliminary Treaty" (in Russian). 1878. Archived from the original on 21 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ The Treaty of Berlin, 1878 – Excerpts on the Balkans. Internet Modern History Sourcebook. Berlin: Fordham University. 13 July 1878. Archived from the original on 8 June 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Patterson, Michelle (August 1996). "The Road to Romanian Independence". Canadian Journal of History. Archived from the original (– Scholar search) on 24 March 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Anderson, Frank Maloy; Hershey, Amos Shartle (1918). Handbook for the Diplomatic History of Europe, Asia, and Africa 1870–1914. Washington D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Jump up ^ Horne, Charles F. "Romania's Declaration of War with Austria-Hungary". Source Records of the Great War. Archived from the original on 7 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Erlikman, Vadim (2004). Poteri narodonaseleniia v XX veke : spravochnik. Moscow. ISBN 5-93165-107-1.
Jump up ^ Bernard Anthony Cook (2001). Europe Since 1945: An Encyclopedia. Taylor&Francis. p. 162. ISBN 0-8153-4057-5.
Jump up ^ "Text of the Treaty of Trianon". World War I Document Archive. Archived from the original on 4 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Malbone W. Graham (October 1944). "The Legal Status of the Bukovina and Bessarabia". The American Journal of International Law. American Society of International Law. 38 (4): 667–673. doi:10.2307/2192802. JSTOR 2192802.
Jump up ^ "World War I: The Players". www.mtholyoke.edu. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Statul National Unitar (România Mare 1919–1940)" (in Romanian). ici.ro. Archived from the original on 12 June 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "his1". Aneir-cpce.ro. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "VIDEO Înregistrare senza?ionala cu Hitler: "Fara petrolul din România nu a? fi atacat niciodata URSS-ul"". adevarul.ro. Archived from the original on 11 November 2012. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Business in Romania: a country that's fast off the Bloc – Two years of EU membership have transformed the business face of Romania and savvy UK firms are reaping the rewards. Paul Bray reports". The Daily Telegraph. London. 24 February 2010. Archived from the original on 29 May 2010. Retrieved 1 May 2010.
Jump up ^ "Post-War Romania". www.shsu.edu. Archived from the original on 9 March 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ Ioan Scurtu; Theodora Stanescu-Stanciu; Georgiana Margareta Scurtu (2002). Istoria Românilor între anii 1918–1940 (in Romanian). University of Bucharest. Archived from the original on 13 November 2007.
Jump up ^ Nagy-Talavera, Nicolas M. (1970). Green Shirts and Others: a History of Fascism in Hungary and Romania. Hoover Institution Press. p. 305. ISBN 973-9432-11-5.
Jump up ^ Ioan Scurtu; Theodora Stanescu-Stanciu; Georgiana Margareta Scurtu. "Decret regal privind investirea generalului Ion Antonescu cu depline puteri". Istoria românilor între anii 1918–1940 (in Romanian). Archived from the original on 2 October 2011. Retrieved 19 September 2011.
Jump up ^ M. Broszat (1968). "Deutschland – Ungarn – Rumänien. Entwicklung und Grundfaktoren nationalsozialistischer Hegemonial- und Bündnispolitik 1938–1941". Historische Zeitschrift (in German) (206): 552–553.
Jump up ^ Note: follow the World War II link: Ronald D. Bachman, ed. (9 November 2005). Romania:World War II (Report) (2 ed.). Washington D.C.: Library of Congress.Federal Research Division. Archived from the original on 14 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Ilie Fugaru, Romania clears doubts about Holocaust past, UPI, 11 November 2004
Jump up ^ International Commission on the Holocaust in Romania (28 January 2012). "Executive Summary: Historical Findings and Recommendations" (PDF). Final Report of the International Commission on the Holocaust in Romania. Yad Vashem (The Holocaust Martyrs' and Heroes' Remembrance Authority). Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 January 2012. Retrieved 28 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Associated, The (17 April 2012). "Study: More than 280,000 Jews killed in Romania in WWII – Haaretz Daily Newspaper | Israel News". Haaretz.com. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013. Retrieved 24 April 2012.
Jump up ^ "Ion Antonescu | ruler of Romania". Archived from the original on 20 May 2016. Retrieved 28 June 2016.
Jump up ^ "Holocaust Education, Remembrance, and Research in Romania". holocaustremembrance.com. Archived from the original on 17 April 2015. Retrieved 4 April 2015.
Jump up ^ Axworthy, Mark; Scafes, Cornel; Craciunoiu, Cristian (editors) (1995). Third axis, Fourth Ally: Romanian Armed Forces In the European War 1941–1945. London: Arms & Armour Press. pp. 1–368. ISBN 963-389-606-1.
Jump up ^ "The Biggest Mistakes in World War 2:Ploesti – the most important target". Archived from the original on 18 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Constantiniu, Florin, O istorie sincera a poporului român ("An Honest History of the Romanian People"), Ed. Univers Enciclopedic, Bucure?ti, 1997, ISBN 973-9243-07-X
Jump up ^ Clodfelter, Michael (2002). Warfare and Armed Conflicts- A Statistical Reference to Casualty and Other Figures, 1500–2000 (2 ed.). Jefferson, NC: McFarland. p. 582. ISBN 0-7864-1204-6.
Jump up ^ Tomiuc, Eugen (6 May 2005). "World War II – 60 Years After: Former Romanian Monarch Remembers Decision To Switch Sides". Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Giurescu, "«Alegeri" dupa model sovietic", p.17 (citing Berry), 18 (citing Berry and note); Macuc, p.40; Tismaneanu, p.113
Jump up ^ "Romania: Country studies – Chapter 1.7.1 "Petru Groza's Premiership"". Federal research Division, Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 14 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romania". CIA – The World Factbook. Archived from the original on 10 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romania – Country Background and Profile". ed-u.com. Archived from the original on 10 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Rîjnoveanu, Carmen (2003). "Romania's Policy of Autonomy in the Context of the Sino-Soviet Conflict" (PDF). Czech Republic Military History Institute, Militärgeschichtliches Forscheungamt. p. 1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 June 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Roper, Stephen D. (2000). Romania: The Unfinished Revolution. London: Routledge. p. 18. ISBN 90-5823-027-9.
Jump up ^ Cioroianu, Adrian (2005). On the Shoulders of Marx. An Incursion into the History of Romanian Communism (in Romanian). Bucharest: Editura Curtea Veche. pp. 68–73. ISBN 973-669-175-6.
Jump up ^ Stoica, Stan (2007). Dic?ionar de Istorie a României (in Romanian). Bucharest: Editura Merona. pp. 77–78; 233–34. ISBN 973-7839-21-8.
Jump up ^ Ioni?oiu, Cicerone (2000). Victimele terorii comuniste. Aresta?i, tortura?i, întemni?a?i, uci?i. Dic?ionar (in Romanian). Bucharest: Editura Ma?ina de scris. ISBN 973-99994-2-5.[page needed]
Jump up ^ Consiliul National pentru Studierea Ahivelor Securita?ii, Bande, bandi?i si eroi; Grupurile de rezisten?a ?i Securitatea (1948–1968), Editura Enciclopedica, Bucure?ti, 2003
Jump up ^ Raportul Comisiei Preziden?iale pentru Analiza Dictaturii Comuniste din România (Report). Comisia Preziden?iala pentru Analiza Dictaturii Comuniste din România. 15 December 2006. pp. 215–217.
Jump up ^ Political Tension 1968 (in Romanian). Bucharest: British Pathé. 21 August 1968. Archived from the original on 21 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Romania: Soviet Union and Eastern Europe". Country Studies.us. Archived from the original on 5 July 2009. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Middle East policies in Communist Romania". Country Studies.us. Archived from the original on 5 July 2009. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Deletant, Dennis. "New Evidence on Romania and the Warsaw Pact, 1955–1989" (PDF). Cold War International History Project e-Dossier Series. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Carothers, Thomas. "Romania: The Political Background" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 August 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008. This seven-year period can be characterized as a gradualistic, often ambiguous transition away from communist rule towards democracy.
Jump up ^ Hellman, Joel (January 1998). "Winners Take All: The Politics of Partial Reform in Postcommunist". Transitions World Politics. 50 (2): 203–234.
Jump up ^ "Institutul de Investigare a Crimelor Comunismului si Memoria Exilului Romanesc". mineriade.iiccr.ro. Archived from the original on 22 August 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Institutul de Investigare a Crimelor Comunismului si Memoria Exilului Romanesc". mineriade.iiccr.ro. Archived from the original on 22 August 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ Bohlen, Celestine (15 June 1990). "Evolution in Europe; Romanian miners invade Bucharest". The New York Times. Retrieved 31 August 2008. Responding to an emergency appeal by President Ion Iliescu, thousands of miners from northern Romania descended on the capital city today
Jump up ^ "Institutul de Investigare a Crimelor Comunismului si Memoria Exilului Romanesc". mineriade.iiccr.ro. Archived from the original on 22 August 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ Presa internationala despre alegerile din Romania: Traian Basescu a castigat la limita; Romanii au mici sperante sa se dezghete ajutorul de la FMI – International Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. HotNews.ro. Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "Romania profile – Leaders – BBC News-GB". Archived from the original on 17 July 2016. Retrieved 28 June 2016.
Jump up ^ "Biroul Electoral Central, rezultate". Biroul Electoral Central. 2012. Archived from the original on 15 March 2016. Retrieved 7 October 2016.
Jump up ^ "Curtea Constitutionala a invalidat referendumul cu scorul 6–3. Traian Basescu revine la Cotroceni". Hotnews. 2012. Archived from the original on 10 October 2016. Retrieved 7 October 2016.
Jump up ^ Bucharest, Ian Traynor Roberta Radu in; agencies-GB (30 July 2012). "Romania's president Basescu survives impeachment vote". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 25 February 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ Claudia POPESCU. "DEINDUSTRIALIZATION AND URBAN SHRINKAGE IN ROMANIA. WHAT LESSONS FOR THE SPATIAL POLICY?". Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 8 October 2016.
Jump up ^ "Statul român a pierdut 20 miliarde de dolari prin privatizarea Petrom". Vocea Rusiei. Archived from the original on 16 September 2016. Retrieved 27 August 2016.
Jump up ^ "Statul a oferit OMV Petrom zacaminte de 14 miliarde de dolari". www.jurnalul.ro. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 27 August 2016.
Jump up ^ "CER | Romania's Unforeseeable Turning Point". www.ce-review.org. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Romania shuts door on Gabriel's giant Rosia Montana gold mine". Financial Post. Archived from the original on 6 April 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Romania PM Ponta resigns over Bucharest nightclub fire Archived 15 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine.". BBC News. 4 November 2015.
Jump up ^ "NATO update: NATO welcomes seven new members". NATO. Archived from the original on 11 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "EU approves Bulgaria and Romania". BBC News. 26 September 2006. Archived from the original on 3 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Adevarul". Adevarul.ro. Archived from the original on 20 September 2008. Retrieved 25 September 2010.
^ Jump up to: a b Human Development Report 2009 – Country Fact Sheets – Romania Archived 1 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine.. Hdrstats.undp.org. Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Tracking the Millennium Development Goal Archived 26 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine.. MDG Monitor. Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Joe Parkinson (4 December 2009). "Romania Faces Crucial Vote". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 10 July 2017.
Jump up ^ Romania and the IMF Archived 9 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Gheorghe Stoica; Lavinia Stan. "Romanian Politics in 2012: Intra-Cabinet Coexistence and Political Instability". South-East European Journal of Political Science. Archived from the original on 24 February 2014.
Jump up ^ "Romania's Infrastructure and International Transport Links". Assessment of the Romanian Economy. Romania Central. Archived from the original on 21 March 2009. Retrieved 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Romania, world's 53rd country in quality of life index « Denisa Morariu[dead link]. Denisamorariu.wordpress.com (8 January 2010). Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Sistemul de invatamant distrus de lipsa reformelor – Cluj Archived 5 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine.. citynews.ro. Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ D+C 2010/03 – Focus – Roos: In Romania and Bulgaria, civil-society organisations are demanding rule of law – Development and Cooperation – International Journal Archived 9 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine.. Inwent.org. Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "Romania is booming". The Economist. 17 December 2013. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017.
Jump up ^ "Human Development Report 2016 – "Human Development for Everyone"" (PDF). HDRO (Human Development Report Office) United Nations Development Programme. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 August 2017. Retrieved 22 March 2017.
^ Jump up to: a b "Romania". Germany: focus-migration.de. Archived from the original on 7 February 2009. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Thorpe, Nick (2 January 2014). "EU migration: Romania's absent parents". BBC. Archived from the original on 17 July 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2016.
Jump up ^ Schmitt, Caroline (27 November 2014). "Mothering via Skype: Europe's absentee parents". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 23 April 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2016.
^ Jump up to: a b "Geography, Meteorology and Environment" (PDF) (in Romanian). Romanian Statistical Yearbook. 2004. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
Jump up ^ "Romania's Biodiversity". Ministry of Waters, Forests and Environmental Protection of Romania (via enrin.grida.no). Archived from the original on 10 February 2008. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Protected Areas in Romania". Romanian Ministry of Waters, Forests and Environmental Protection (via envir.ee). Archived from the original on 17 November 2007. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Danube Delta". UNESCO's World Heritage Centre. Archived from the original on 27 January 2008. Retrieved 9 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Danube Delta Reserve Biosphere". Romanian Ministry of Waters, Forests and Environmental Protection (via envir.ee). Archived from the original on 26 April 2005. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Danube Delta". UNESCO's World Heritage Centre. Archived from the original on 27 January 2008. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ Wohl, Ellen (2010). A World of Rivers: Environmental Change on Ten of the World's Great Rivers. University of Chicago Press. p. 130. ISBN 0-226-90478-4. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015 – via Google Books.
Jump up ^ "Romania". Fao.org. Archived from the original on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b "Flora si fauna salbatica" (in Romanian). enrin.grida.no. Archived from the original on 23 February 2009. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
Jump up ^ "EarthTrends: Biodiversity and Protected Areas – Romania" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 September 2007. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Bears. Status Survey and Conservation Action Plan" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 2 October 2014.
Jump up ^ "Canids: Foxes, Wolves, Jackals and Dogs. Status Survey and Conservation Action Plan" (PDF). IUCN/SSC Canid Specialist Group. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 2 October 2014.
Jump up ^ "Romania: Climate". U.S. Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 23 September 2006. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b "Permafrost Monitoring and Prediction in Southern Carpathians, Romania". CliC International Project Office (CIPO). 22 December 2004. Archived from the original on 16 May 2011. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "The 2004 Yearbook" (PDF) (in Romanian). Romanian National Institute of Statistics. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Clima Romaniei | Site-ul Administratiei Nationale de Meteorologie Archived 22 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Klimatafel von Rumänien". Baseline climate means (1961–1990) from stations all over the world (in German). Deutscher Wetterdienst. Archived from the original on 24 July 2015. Retrieved 20 December 2016.
Jump up ^ Verheijen, Tony (14 March 1990). "Oxford Scholarship Online: Semi-Presidentialism in Europe". Oxfordscholarship.com. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Romania. The Europa World Year Book. 2 (48 ed.). London and New York: Routledge. 2007. pp. 3734–3759. ISBN 978-1-85743-412-5.
Jump up ^ "Se schimba sistemul de vot. Deputa?ii au adoptat noua Lege Electorala propusa de USL". Antena3.ro. Archived from the original on 31 October 2012. Retrieved 12 October 2012.
Jump up ^ "Presentation". High Court of Cassation and Justice -—Romania. Archived from the original on 10 September 2012. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romanian Legal system". CIA Factbook. 2000. Archived from the original on 25 January 2008. Retrieved 11 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Understanding the WTO – members". WTO. Archived from the original on 17 January 2010. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b c d "Foreign Policy Priorities of Romania for 2008" (in Romanian). Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 14 September 2008. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Background Note: Romania – U.S.-Romanian Relations". U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 8 April 2008.
Jump up ^ [2] Archived 12 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Gabriel Andreescu; Valentin Stan; Renate Weber (30 October 1994). "Romania'S Relations with the Republic of Moldova". International Studies. Centre for International Studies. Archived from the original on 23 February 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Ihrig, Stefan. "Rediscovering History, Rediscovering Ultimate Truth" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 October 2008. Retrieved 17 September 2008.
Jump up ^ "Moldova, Romania open new chapter in bilateral relations". People's Daily. 29 April 2010. Archived from the original on 18 May 2013. Retrieved 11 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Press conference" (Press release). Ministry of National Defense of Romania. 21 January 2003. Archived from the original on 3 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "MoND Budget as of 2007" (in Romanian). Ziarul Financiar. 30 October 2006. Archived from the original on 22 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romania Finally Settles On Portuguese F-16s" Archived 6 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "PICTURES: Romania accepts first C-27J Spartans-12/04/2010-London". Flightglobal.com. Archived from the original on 15 April 2010. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
Jump up ^ "Spartan Order". Aviation Week & Space Technology. 11 December 2006.
Jump up ^ "Romania: 2 soldiers killed, 1 injured in Afghanistan". Colorado Springs Gazette. Associated Press. 7 May 2016. Archived from the original on 17 August 2016. Retrieved 7 July 2016.
Jump up ^ "Romania To Send 450 More Troops To Afghanistan". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 21 December 2014. Archived from the original on 19 September 2016. Retrieved 7 July 2016.
Jump up ^ "Romania ends combat mission in Afghanistan with visit from Prime Minister". Associated Press. 30 June 2014. Archived from the original on 14 October 2017. Retrieved 7 July 2016.
Jump up ^ "Traian Basescu: Romania va trimite fregata Regele Ferdinand cu 205 militari in Mediterana pentru operatiuni de blocare a oricarei nave suspecte ca transporta armament" (in Romanian). HotNews.ro. 22 March 2011. Archived from the original on 25 March 2011. Retrieved 22 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Romania ratifies US missile shield agreement". SpaceWar. 6 December 2012. Archived from the original on 2 February 2013.
Jump up ^ "Geografia Romaniei" (in Romanian). descopera.net. Archived from the original on 19 February 2009. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
^ Jump up to: a b "1.8". Administrative Organisation of Romanian Territory, on December 31, 2005 (PDF) (Report) (in Romanian). Romanian National Institute of Statistics. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b "Hierarchical list of the Nomenclature of territorial units for statistics – NUTS and the Statistical regions of Europe". Archived from the original on 18 January 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "LEGE nr. 151 din 15 iulie 1998" (in Romanian). Archived from the original on 2 December 2013. Retrieved 1 July 2012.
Jump up ^ "2011 Regions Population". INSSE. 4 July 2013. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013. Retrieved 9 July 2013.
^ Jump up to: a b "Population at 20 October 2011" (in Romanian). INSSE. 5 July 2013. Retrieved 5 July 2013.[dead link]
Jump up ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 21 April 2017., IMF World Economic Outlook Database, April 2017
Jump up ^ World Bank – Data for Romania 2016 Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "GDP per capita, consumption per capita and price level indices". Archived from the original on 2 July 2017. Retrieved 13 June 2017.
Jump up ^ "GDP in 2006" (PDF) (in Romanian). Romanian National Institute of Statistics. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 February 2008. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ nytimes.com: "Romania to Get Next Installment of Bailout" 1 Nov 2010 Archived 31 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Veste excelenta pentru Romania de la Banca Mondiala (Video)". Archived from the original on 18 June 2014. Retrieved 11 June 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b "In January 2017, the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was estimated at 5.4%" (PDF) (Press release). National Institute of Statistics. 31 January 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 March 2017. Retrieved 9 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "Average gross earnings in Romania" (PDF). 16 March 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "Eurostat, HICP – monthly data (12-month average rate of change)". Eurostat. Archived from the original on 5 March 2017. Retrieved 5 March 2017.
Jump up ^ Industrial production up by 0.4% in euro area and EU27|Eurostat. Eurostat (12 April 2013). Retrieved on 13 May 2013.
Jump up ^ Chirileasa, Andrei (9 June 2014). "Top 20 companies in Romania by turnover". Romania-Insider.com. Archived from the original on 12 June 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "IMF World Economic Outlook Database, April 2011 – Central and Eastern Europe". IMF. April 2011. Archived from the original on 15 October 2011. Retrieved 27 April 2011.
Jump up ^ "Index of Economic Freedom: Romania". heritage.org. Archived from the original on 5 January 2005. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Taxation trends in the EU (PDF) (Report). Eurostat. 26 June 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romania". CIA World Factbook. 2010. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011. Retrieved 27 April 2011.
Jump up ^ "Romania: FDI reached over EUR 8.3 bn". Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Economy Ranking. Doing Business (Report). World Bank. 2007. Archived from the original on 15 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Doing Business 2007 Report (Report). World Bank. Archived from the original on 8 March 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Fifth Report on the Practical Preparations for the Future Enlargement of the Euro Area" (PDF). Commission of the European Communities. 16 July 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 October 2007. Retrieved 31 May 2013.
Jump up ^ "Banca Na?ionala a României". bnr.ro. Archived from the original on 30 September 2015. Retrieved 29 September 2015.
Jump up ^ "Length of roads in Romania 2015" (PDF). INSSE. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 November 2016. Retrieved 16 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "Reteaua feroviara" (in Romanian). cfr.to. Archived from the original on 8 June 2009. Retrieved 6 September 2009.
Jump up ^ "Metrorex ridership" (in Romanian). Financial Week newspaper. 23 April 2007. Archived from the original on 16 May 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Ann.aero database Archived 26 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Jump up to: a b c [[[List of countries by electricity consumption]] "List of countries by electricity consumption"] Check |url= value (help). Retrieved 20 February 2017.
Jump up ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 December 2015. Retrieved 9 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Raport Anual 2015 energie" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 20 February 2017.
Jump up ^ Ana Hontz-Ward. "Romania Expects to be Energy Independent Despite Ukraine Crisis". Voanews.com. Archived from the original on 18 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Contractul pentru unitatile 3 si 4 de la centrala nucleara Cernavoda se va parafa in mai. Chinezii v-or avea 51% din actiuni – Nicolae Moga (PSD) – Energie – HotNews.ro". Economie.hotnews.ro. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Numarul conexiunilor la internet a crescut cu 22,8%. Câte milioane de români au acces la internet". Gândul. 4 December 2014. Archived from the original on 9 April 2015.
Jump up ^ • Chart: Blistering BroadBand: Europe's fastest downloaders -> Statista Archived 22 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Top 10: Where to Find the World's Fastest Internet". Bloomberg. 23 January 2013. Archived from the original on 28 June 2016.
Jump up ^ "Romanian city comes out first in the world in Internet download speed ranking". Net Index. 3 July 2013. Archived from the original on 6 July 2013.
Jump up ^ "Country/Economy Profiles: Romania, Page 329 Travel&Tourism" (PDF). World Economic Forum. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 April 2013. Retrieved 16 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "WTTC spells out policy recommendations for Romania to tap travel and tourism potential". WTTC. Retrieved 11 January 2008.[dead link]
Jump up ^ "Worldbank Tourism in Romania". worldbank.org. Archived from the original on 25 August 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Tourism attracted in 2005 investments worth €400 million" (in Romanian). Gandul Newspaper. Retrieved 11 January 2008.[dead link]
Jump up ^ Report from Romanian National Institute of Statistics (PDF) (Report). Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 February 2008. Retrieved 11 January 2008. for the first 9 months of 2007 an increase from the previous year of 8.7% to 16.5 million tourists; of these 94.0% came from European countries and 61.7% from EU
Jump up ^ Criza ne strica vacan?a Archived 2 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine., 9 July 2010, jurnalul.ro, accessed on 21 August 2010
Jump up ^ "Tan and fun at the Black Sea". UnseenRomania. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Castelul Bran, marcat de istorie, dar si de legenda lui Dracula atrage anual sute de mii de turisti". www.digi24.ro. Archived from the original on 22 August 2016. Retrieved 28 June 2016.
Jump up ^ "Turismul renaste la tara" (in Romanian). Romania Libera. 5 July 2008. Archived from the original on 2 August 2008. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Bine ati venit pe site-ul de promovare a pensiunilor agroturistice din Romania !!!" (in Romanian). RuralTourism.ro. Archived from the original on 14 September 2008. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Turism in Romania". Turism.ro. Archived from the original on 2 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Ansamblul sculptural Constantin Brancusi din Targu Jiu". Romaniaturistica.com. 16 March 1957. Archived from the original on 9 September 2012. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ How important is tourism in Romania’s economy? Archived 6 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Jump up to: a b Over 1.9 million tourists visit Romania, where do they come from – Romania Insider Archived 4 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Traian Vuia in a Century of Aviation". Romanian Academy Library. p. 1. Archived from the original on 27 July 2013. Retrieved 7 August 2012.
Jump up ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 9 February 2011.
Jump up ^ "Laserul de la Magurele: Institutul de Cercetare pentru Fizica si Inginerie Nucleara a semnat contractul de 66 milioane euro pentru realizarea Sistemului Fascicul Gamma – Esential". HotNews.ro. Archived from the original on 11 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Bulgaria: Science fortunes of Balkan neighbours diverge – Novinite.com – Sofia News Agency". Novinite.com. 13 January 2011. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Science fortunes of Balkan neighbours diverge : Nature News". Nature.com. Archived from the original on 16 January 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Funeriu: Stiinta din Romania 'se imbunatateste', insa mai sunt multe lucruri de facut". Epochtimes-romania.com. 13 January 2011. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Romania is to sign agreement on joining European space agency convention". Actmedia.eu. 20 January 2011. Archived from the original on 24 January 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Romania's high hopes for science : Nature News". Nature.com. Archived from the original on 19 March 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "ELI-NP | Extreme Light Infrastructure – Nuclear Physics". Eli-np.ro. Archived from the original on 6 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "VIDEO Romania's first satellite Goliat successfully launch from Kourou base in French Guyana – Top News". HotNews.ro. Archived from the original on 6 April 2014. Retrieved 4 April 2014.
Jump up ^ "Romania will own a part of the International Space Station and will contribute to the development of the latest European rocket, Ariane 6". Romanian Space Agency. 3 December 2014. Archived from the original on 8 December 2014.
Jump up ^ "European effort spotlights plight of the Roma". usatoday. 10 February 2005. Archived from the original on 23 January 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b Official site of the results of the 2002 Census (Report) (in Romanian). Archived from the original on 5 February 2012. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "German Population of Romania, 1930–1948". hungarian-history.hu. Archived from the original on 17 August 2007. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
^ Jump up to: a b The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency Archived 24 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Eurostat – Tables, Graphs and Maps Interface (TGM) table Archived 27 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Villeret, Graeme. "Roumanie". PopulationData.net. Archived from the original on 15 March 2016. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Romania demographics profile (2011)". Indexmundi.com. 12 July 2011. Archived from the original on 8 November 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "CIA World Factbook: Romania". Cia.gov. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013. Retrieved 2 October 2013.
Jump up ^ "Focus-Migration: Romania". focus-migration.hwwi.de (in German). Archived from the original on 20 July 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ MIGRATION AND ASYLUM IN CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE Archived 16 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine. European Parliament
Jump up ^ "2011 census results by native language" (xls). www.recensamantromania.ro, website of the Romanian Institute of Statistics. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 5 May 2015.
Jump up ^ "IARNA UCRAINEANA – Afla care sunt localita?ile din Maramure? în care se praznuiesc sarbatorile de iarna dupa rit vechi" [Ukrainian winter: find out in which communes of Maramure? are the Winter holidays celebrated by the old calendar], Infomm.ro, archived from the original on 18 May 2015, retrieved 5 May 2015
Jump up ^ "Constitutia României". Cdep.ro. Archived from the original on 7 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Two-thirds of working age adults in the EU28 in 2011 state they know a foreign language" (PDF). Eurostat. 26 September 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 September 2013. Retrieved 21 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Roumanie – Organisation internationale de la Francophonie". francophonie.org. Archived from the original on 14 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "EUROPEANS AND THEIR LANGUAGES, REPORT" (PDF). Eurostat. 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 21 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "2011 census results by religion" (xls). www.recensamantromania.ro, website of the Romanian Institute of Statistics. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 5 May 2015.
Jump up ^ Profiles of the Eastern Churches Archived 29 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine. at cnewa.org
Jump up ^ European Court of Human Rights – Case of Metropolitan Church of Bessarabia Archived 30 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Urbanization of Romania: how urban population increased from 3.7 million in 1948 to 12 million in 1989". Businessday.ro. Archived from the original on 22 April 2014. Retrieved 24 April 2012.
Jump up ^ "Urban Audit". Urban Audit. Archived from the original on 31 May 2013. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Proiect – Zona metropolitana Bucuresti". Zmb.ro. Archived from the original on 2 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Metropolitan Zone of Bucharest will be ready in 10 years" (in Romanian). Romania Libera. Archived from the original on 3 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Official site of Metropolitan Zone of Bucharest Project" (in Romanian). Archived from the original on 2 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Population at 20 October 2011" (in Romanian). INSSE. 5 July 2013. Retrieved 5 July 2013.
Jump up ^ The Romanian Educational Policy in Transition (Report). UNESCO. Archived from the original on 2 October 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romanian Institute of Statistics Yearbook – Chapter 8" (PDF) (in Romanian). Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 August 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "UN Human Development Report 2006" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 February 2007.
Jump up ^ Clasa pregatitoare, obligatorie din septembrie. Ce vor învata copiii si cum vor fi evaluati – Mediafax Archived 26 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ The Romanian Educational Policy in Transition (Report). UNESCO. Archived from the original on 1 October 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Limited relevants. What feminists can learn from the eastern experience" (PDF). genderomania.ro. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2008. Retrieved 25 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Rezultate PISA 2012: Aproape 40% dintre elevii romani au dificultati sa citeasca si sa inteleaga un text si pot rezolva doar exercitii de baza la Matematica (Report). Hotnews.ro. 3 December 2013. Archived from the original on 9 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Over 40pct of Romania's children struggling with functional literacy | Nine O`Clock". www.nineoclock.ro-US. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 21 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Romania's brains rank first in Europe, 10th in the world after Math Olympiad" (in Romanian). romania-insider.com. 16 July 2012. Archived from the original on 18 July 2012.
Jump up ^ "Romanian students win four medals, two gold, at the European Girls Mathematical Olympiad". business-review.eu. 16 April 2014. Archived from the original on 9 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Romanian students win 32 medals at SEEMOUS International Mathematical Olympiad". AGERPRES. 11 March 2014. Archived from the original on 8 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "QS World University Rankings 2013". topuniversities.com. October 2013. Archived from the original on 21 October 2016. All four universities are ranked at 700+ which means they are ranked among the 701–800 places.
Jump up ^ "Ritli: Ministry of Health budget for 2012 can provide the assistance at least at the level of previous year" Archived 24 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine., Mediafax.ro
Jump up ^ "Romania, 4th in Europe in TB" Archived 24 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine., România Libera
Jump up ^ "Our patients vs. theirs: How many hospitals has Romania compared to other EU countries", Wall-Street.ro
Jump up ^ "Fewer hospital beds for sick Romanians" Archived 5 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine., România Libera
Jump up ^ "Personalul medico-sanitar pe categorii, forme de proprietate, sexe, macroregiuni, regiuni de dezvoltare ?i jude?e" Archived 23 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine., Institutul Na?ional de Statistica
Jump up ^ "«De profesie: medic în România». Cum încearca ministrul Nicolaescu sa-i ?ina pe doctori în ?ara" Archived 1 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine., Adevarul, 2 April 2013
Jump up ^ "Cultural aspects". National Institute for Research & Development in Informatics, Romania. Archived from the original on 7 March 2008. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Mihai Eminescu" (in Romanian). National Institute for Research & Development in Informatics, Romania. Archived from the original on 31 December 2007. Retrieved 20 January 2008.
Jump up ^ Tom Sandqvist, DADA EAST: The Romanians of Cabaret Voltaire, London MIT Press, 2006.
Jump up ^ ?tefanescu, Alex. (1999). Nichita Stanescu, The Angel with a Book in His Hands (in Romanian). Ma?ina de scris. p. 8. ISBN 978-973-99297-4-5.
Jump up ^ "Brancusi's 'Bird in Space' Sets World Auction Record for Sculpture at $27,456,000". Antiques and the Arts Online. Archived from the original on 13 February 2006. Retrieved 20 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "November 9, The price record for a Brancusi masterpiece was set up in 2005 when "Bird in Space" was sold for USD 27.5 M". Romanian Information Center in Brussels. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 20 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "George Enescu, the composer". International Enescu Society. Archived from the original on 19 October 2007. Retrieved 20 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Sounds Like Canada feat. Gheorghe Zamfir". CBC Radio. 17 January 2006. Archived from the original on 28 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Gheorghe Zamfir, master of the pan pipe". Gheorghe Zamfir, Official Homepage. Archived from the original on 30 October 2007. Retrieved 20 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Inna Biography". BBC. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2013.
Jump up ^ "10 One-Hit Wonders to Be or Not to Be?". vh1.i. 7 March 2014. Archived from the original on 13 March 2014.
Jump up ^ Arsenie, Dan. "Paula Seling despre rezultatul la Eurovision 2010: "Mai bine de atât nu se putea!"". EVZ.ro. Archived from the original on 28 August 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Cannes 2007 Winners". Alternative Film Guide. Archived from the original on 4 July 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Mike Collett-White (16 February 2013). "Romanian film "Child's Pose" wins Berlin Golden Bear". Reuters. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015.
Jump up ^ "World Heritage Site – Romania". UNESCO. Archived from the original on 31 October 2004. Retrieved 31 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Report on the Nominations from Luxembourg and Romania for the European Capital of Culture 2007" (PDF). The Selection Panel for the European Capital of Culture (ECOC) 2007. 5 April 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Muzeul National Peles | Site-ul oficial al castelelor Peles si Pelisor". Peles.ro. Archived from the original on 28 August 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Castelul Bran". Viaromania.eu. Archived from the original on 8 October 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Public holidays enacted by labour code" Archived 18 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine., Labor code, 22 March 2017
Jump up ^ Improve It Grup S.R.L. "Traditii si obiceiuri romanesti. Artizanat traditional romanesc. Arta populara". Traditii.ro. Archived from the original on 3 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ Insider, Romania (21 December 2012). "Winter holidays and Christmas traditions in Romania: the Bear dance, the Masked carolers and the Goat". Romania-Insider.com. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "ROMANIA – Traditions and Folklore – Official Travel and Tourism Information". Romaniatourism.com. Archived from the original on 23 July 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Ministrul Agriculturii: UE accepta ca mieii de Pasti si porcii de Craciun sa fie sacrificati in mod traditional – Actualitate". HotNews.ro. 11 August 2014. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ Martisor, a Spring celebration for Eastern Europeans (29 June 2014). "Martisor, a Spring celebration for Eastern Europeans". Foreigners In Uk. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Christina Bradatan, Cuisine and Cultural Identity in Balkans". Scholarworks.iu.edu. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ Recipes, Gourmet European. "Romanian Recipes – like mom used to make". www.gourmet-european-recipes.com-gb. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "28 Romanian Foods The Whole World Should Know – oneJive". onejive.com-US. Archived from the original on 12 August 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Retete traditionale Moldova: retete peste sau cu carne de porc". Bucataras.ro. 15 December 2008. Archived from the original on 5 January 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Bucatarie romaneasca – Cultura si retete – Articole". Gastronomie.ele.ro. Archived from the original on 30 April 2007. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "?uica production consumed 75% of Romanian plums in 2003". Regard-est.com. Archived from the original on 29 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Study in Romania". Educations.com. 5 February 2008. Archived from the original on 28 December 2010. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Beer consumption per capita in 2008". kirinholdings.co.jp. Retrieved 17 March 2017.[permanent dead link]
Jump up ^ "Topul sporturilor în func?ie de numarul de sportivi legitima?i". zf.ro. 12 January 2012. Archived from the original on 9 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Romania: FIFA/Coca-Cola World Ranking". FIFA.com. Archived from the original on 3 July 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Hagi leaves Romania post". BBC Sport. 26 November 2001. Archived from the original on 22 January 2003. Retrieved 31 August 2008. Hagi earned a legendary status in Romania where he spearheaded the 'Golden Generation' of players ...
Jump up ^ "Hagi snubs Maradona". BBC Sport Online. 6 April 2001. Archived from the original on 19 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b c "Romania". The Europa World Year Book. 2. Routledge. 2007.
Jump up ^ Rankings | WTA Tennis English Archived 12 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Rio 2016 – Tennis: Mergea and Tecau win silver in men's doubles tournament", Agerpres, 13 August 2016, archived from the original on 19 August 2017, retrieved 25 August 2016
^ Jump up to: a b "What's the most popular sport in Romania?". cesport.eu. Archived from the original on 6 August 2016. Retrieved 29 May 2016.
Jump up ^ "Cristina Neagu – World Handball Player of the Year 2010". Ihf.info. 13 January 2011. Archived from the original on 2 December 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2014.
Jump up ^ "Originea jocului de Oina – Sport National Roman". Oina.ro. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Recurs la ISTORIE: De ce s-a "prabu?it" România la Olimpiada de la Londra?". adevarul.ro. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ Herman, Robin (28 March 1976). "Gymnast Posts Perfect Mark". New York Times. Archived from the original on 22 November 2008. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Sources
Primary sources
The Ancient History of Herodotus (Translated by William Beloe) (1859). Derby & Jackson.
Eutropius, Abridgment of Roman History (Translated by John Selby Watson) (1886). George Bell and Sons.
Secondary sources
Hitchins, Keith (2014). A Concise History of Romania. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-87238-6.
Pohl, Walter (2013). "National origin narratives in the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy". In Geary, Patrick J.; Klaniczay, Gábor. Manufacturing Middle Ages: Entangled History of Medievalism in Nineteenth-Century Europe. BRILL. pp. 13–50. ISBN 978-90-04-24487-0.
External links
Find more about
Romania
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity
Country Profile from BBC News.
Romania Article and Country Profile from Encyclopædia Britannica
Romania Profile from Balkan Insight.
"Romania". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
Romania information from the United States Department of State.
Portals to the World from the United States Library of Congress.
Romania at UCB Libraries GovPubs.
Romania at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
 Wikimedia Atlas of Romania
 Geographic data related to Romania at OpenStreetMap
Key Development Forecasts for Romania from International Futures.
Romanian Law and Miscellaneous – English
Government
Romanian Presidency
Romanian Parliament
Culture and history links
Treasures of the national library of Romania
Historic Houses of Romania


[hide] v t e
Romania articles
Topics
History	
Timeline Prehistoric Romania Dacia Roman Dacia Early Middle Ages Middle Ages Early Modern Era National awakening United Principalities Kingdom World War I Greater Romania World War II Communist Romania Revolution Since 1989
Geography	
Cities Climate Counties Earthquakes Fauna Flora Islands Lakes Mountains Protected areas Rivers Topography
Politics	
Administrative divisions Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT LGBT history Judiciary Law enforcement Military Parliament Political parties Unification with Moldova
Economy	
Agriculture Energy Exports Foreign investment Foreign trade Industry automotive construction mining petrochemical Leu (currency) National Bank Property bubble Science and technology Services Stock Exchange Telecommunications Tourism Transport
Society	
Crime Demographics Education Healthcare Immigration Languages Minorities Hungarians in Romania Public holidays Religion Romanians Social structure Urban planning Welfare
Culture	
Academy Architecture Art Cinema Cuisine Folklore Humour Literature Media Music Philosophy Sport
Outline Index
Book Category Portal Commons page Commons
[show] v t e
Sovereign states and dependencies of Europe
Terra.pngGeography portal Europe green light.pngEurope portal Flag of Europe.svgEuropean Union portal Flag of NATO.svgNATO portal
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 124251001 LCCN: n79049551 GND: 4050939-4 SUDOC: 026400030 BNF: cb11865467h (data) HDS: 3369 NDL: 00569801
Categories: Romania1859 establishments in EuropeBalkan countriesLiberal democraciesMember states of NATOMember states of the Council of EuropeMember states of the European UnionMember states of the Union for the MediterraneanMember states of the United NationsRepublicsRomance countries and territoriesRomanian-speaking countries and territoriesStates and territories established in 1859
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikinews
Wikiquote
Wikivoyage
Languages
Acèh
????????
????????
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
????
Ænglisc
???????
Aragonés
?????
Armãneashti
Arpetan
Asturianu
Avañe'?
????
Aymar aru
Az?rbaycanca
??????
?????
Bân-lâm-gú
?????????
??????????
?????????? (???????????)?
???????
Bikol Central
Bislama
?????????
Boarisch
???????
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
??????
Català
???????
Cebuano
Ceština
Chavacano de Zamboanga
ChiShona
ChiTumbuka
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Davvisámegiella
Deitsch
Deutsch
??????????
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
????????
Emiliàn e rumagnòl
??????
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
E?egbe
?????
Fiji Hindi
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Fulfulde
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gagauz
Gàidhlig
Galego
???????
?????? ?????? / Gõychi Konknni
???/Hak-kâ-ngî
??????
???
Hausa
Hawai?i
???????
??????
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Igbo
Ilokano
????????????? ???????
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
????
Íslenska
Italiano
?????
Basa Jawa
Kalaallisut
?????
Kapampangan
????????-???????
???????
Kaszëbsczi
???????
Kernowek
Kinyarwanda
Kiswahili
????
Kongo
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî
????????
Ladino
?????
?????
???
Latgalu
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuviu
Ligure
Limburgs
Lingála
Livvinkarjala
La .lojban.
Lumbaart
Magyar
??????????
Malagasy
??????
Malti
Maori
?????
?????????
????
????????
Bahasa Melayu
Mìng-de?ng-ng?¯
Mirandés
???????
????????????
??????
??????????
Nahuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
Nedersaksies
??????
????? ????
???
Napulitano
???????
Nordfriisk
Norfuk / Pitkern
Norsk
Norsk nynorsk
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
???? ?????
?????
Oromoo
O?zbekcha/???????
??????
????
Pangasinan
??????
Papiamentu
????
Patois
????? ????
Picard
Piemontèis
Tok Pisin
Plattdüütsch
Polski
???t?a??
Português
Qaraqalpaqsha
Qirimtatarca
Româna
Romani
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
??????????
???????
???? ????
Gagana Samoa
Sardu
Scots
Seeltersk
Sesotho
Shqip
Sicilianu
?????
Simple English
SiSwati
Slovencina
Slovenšcina
?????????? / ??????????
Slunski
Soomaaliga
?????
Sranantongo
?????? / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / ??????????????
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
?????
Taqbaylit
Tarandíne
???????/tatarça
??????
Tetun
???
????
??????
???
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Twi
??????
??????????
????
???????? / Uyghurche
Vèneto
Vepsän kel’
Ti?ng Vi?t
Volapük
Võro
Walon
??
West-Vlams
Winaray
Wolof
??
??????
Yorùbá
??
Zazaki
Zeêuws
Žemaiteška
??
??????
Kab?y?
Edit links
This page was last edited on 7 January 2018, at 12:10.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Romania
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Romania (disambiguation).
Coordinates: 46°N 25°E

Romania
România  (Romanian)
Flag of Romania
Flag
Coat of arms of Romania
Coat of arms
Anthem: De?teapta-te, române!
'"Awaken thee, Romanian!"

MENU0:00
Location of  Romania  (dark green)– in Europe  (green & dark grey)– in the European Union  (green)  –  [Legend]
Location of  Romania  (dark green)
– in Europe  (green & dark grey)
– in the European Union  (green)  –  [Legend]

Capital
and largest city	Bucharest
44°25'N 26°06'E
Official languages	Romanian[1]
Recognised minority
languages[2]	
Albanian Armenian Bulgarian Czech Croatian German Greek Italian Macedonian Hungarian Polish Romani Russian Rusyn Serbian Slovak Tatar Turkish Ukrainian Yiddish
Ethnic groups (2011[3])	
88.9% Romanians
6.1% Hungarians
3.0% Roma
0.2% Ukrainians
0.2% Germans
Demonym	Romanian
Government	Unitary semi-presidential
republic
• President
Klaus Iohannis
• Prime Minister
Mihai Tudose
Legislature	Parliament
• Upper house
Senate
• Lower house
Chamber of Deputies
Formation
• Kingdom of Dacia
168 BC
• Roman conquest
106
• Migration Period
275 – 10th century
• First Romanian polities
10th century – 1330
• Principality of Wallachia
1330
• Principality of Moldavia
1346
• Principality of Transylvania
1570
• First union under Michael the Brave
1600
• United Principalitiesa
24 January 1859
• Independence from
the Ottoman Empire
9 May 1877 / 1878b
• Kingdom of Romania
14 March 1881
• Great Unionc
1 December 1918d
Area
• Total
238,397 km2 (92,046 sq mi) (81st)
• Water (%)
3
Population
• 2017 estimate
19,638,000 Decrease[4] (59th)
• 2011 census
20,121,641[3] (58th)
• Density
84.4/km2 (218.6/sq mi) (117th)
GDP (PPP)	2018 estimate
• Total
$474.032 billion[5] (42nd)
• Per capita
$25,533 (61st)
GDP (nominal)	2018 estimate
• Total
$204.943 billion[5] (49th)
• Per capita
$11,817 (67th)
Gini (2013)	Steady 34[6]
medium
HDI (2015)	Increase 0.802[7]
very high · 50th
Currency	Romanian Leu (RON)
Time zone	EET (UTC+2)
• Summer (DST)
EEST (UTC+3)
Date format	dd.mm.yyyy (AD)
Drives on the	right
Calling code	+40
Patron saint	Saint Andrew
ISO 3166 code	RO
Internet TLD	.roe
The double election of Alexandru Ioan Cuza in Moldavia and Wallachia (respectively, 5 and 24 January 1859).
Independence proclaimed on 9 May 1877, internationally recognised in 1878.
The union of Romania with Bessarabia, Bukovina and Transylvania in 1918.
Monarchy was abolished on 30 December 1947 upon the proclamation of the People's Republic and was changed with the new constitution upon its adoption on 21 August 1965 as the Socialist Republic. The Communist regime fell on 22 December 1989, the new democratic government was installed on 20 May 1990 and the new post-communist constitution was adopted on 21 November 1991. Romania joined the European Union on 1 January 2007.
Also .eu, shared with other European Union member states.
Romania (/ro?'me?ni?/ (About this sound listen) roh-MAY-nee-?; Romanian: România Listeni[rom?'ni.a]) is a sovereign state located in Southeastern Europe. It borders the Black Sea, Bulgaria, Ukraine, Hungary, Serbia, and Moldova. It has an area of 238,397 square kilometres (92,046 sq mi) and a temperate-continental climate. With almost 20 million inhabitants, the country is the seventh most populous member state of the European Union. Its capital and largest city, Bucharest, is the sixth-largest city in the EU, with 1,883,425 inhabitants as of 2011.[8]

The River Danube, Europe's second-longest river, rises in Germany and flows in a general southeast direction for 2,857 km (1,775 mi), coursing through ten countries before emptying into Romania's Danube Delta. The Carpathian Mountains, which cross Romania from the north to the southwest, include Moldoveanu, at 2,544 m (8,346 ft).[9]

Modern Romania was formed in 1859 through a personal union of the Danubian Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia. The new state, officially named Romania since 1866, gained independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1877. At the end of World War I, Transylvania, Bukovina and Bessarabia united with the sovereign Kingdom of Romania. During World War II, Romania was an ally of Nazi Germany against the Soviet Union, fighting side by side with the Wehrmacht until 1944, when it joined the Allied powers and faced occupation by the Red Army forces. Romania lost several territories, of which Northern Transylvania was regained after the war. Following the war, Romania became a socialist republic and member of the Warsaw Pact. After the 1989 Revolution, Romania began a transition towards democracy and a capitalist market economy.

Romania is a developing country and one of the poorest in the European Union, ranking 50th in the Human Development Index,[10][11] although as of 2017 its economy is growing at an estimated annual rate of 5%, tied with Malta for the highest in the EU.[12] Following rapid economic growth in the early 2000s, Romania has an economy predominantly based on services, and is a producer and net exporter of machines and electric energy, featuring companies like Automobile Dacia and OMV Petrom. It has been a member of NATO since 2004, and part of the European Union since 2007. A strong majority of the population identify themselves as Eastern Orthodox Christians and are native speakers of Romanian, a Romance language. The cultural history of Romania is often referred to when dealing with influential artists, musicians, inventors, and sportspeople.

Contents  [hide] 
1	Etymology
1.1	Official names
2	History
2.1	Early history
2.2	Middle Ages
2.3	Independence and monarchy
2.4	World Wars and Greater Romania
2.5	Communism
2.6	Contemporary period
2.7	NATO and EU integration
3	Geography and climate
3.1	Climate
4	Governance
4.1	Foreign relations
4.2	Military
4.3	Administrative divisions
5	Economy
5.1	Infrastructure
5.2	Tourism
5.3	Science and technology
6	Demographics
6.1	Languages
6.2	Religion
6.3	Urbanization
6.4	Education
6.5	Healthcare
7	Culture
7.1	Arts and monuments
7.2	Holidays, traditions and cuisine
7.3	Sports
8	See also
9	Notes
10	References
11	Sources
11.1	Primary sources
11.2	Secondary sources
12	External links
12.1	Government
12.2	Culture and history links
Etymology
Main article: Name of Romania
Romania derives from the Latin romanus, meaning "citizen of Rome".[13] The first known use of the appellation was attested in the 16th century by Italian humanists travelling in Transylvania, Moldavia, and Wallachia.[14][15][16][17]


Neac?u's letter from 1521, the oldest surviving document written in Romanian.
The oldest known surviving document written in Romanian, a 1521 letter known as the "Letter of Neac?u from Câmpulung",[18] is also notable for including the first documented occurrence of the country's name: Wallachia is mentioned as ?eara Rumâneasca (old spelling for "The Romanian Land"; ?eara from the Latin terra, "land"; current spelling: ?ara Româneasca).

Two spelling forms: român and rumân were used interchangeably[a] until sociolinguistic developments in the late 17th century led to semantic differentiation of the two forms: rumân came to mean "bondsman", while român retained the original ethnolinguistic meaning.[19] After the abolition of serfdom in 1746, the word rumân gradually fell out of use and the spelling stabilised to the form român.[b] Tudor Vladimirescu, a revolutionary leader of the early 19th century, used the term Rumânia to refer exclusively to the principality of Wallachia."[20]

The use of the name Romania to refer to the common homeland of all Romanians—its modern-day meaning—was first documented in the early 19th century.[c] The name has been officially in use since 11 December 1861.[21]

In English, the name of the country was formerly spelt Rumania or Roumania.[22] Romania became the predominant spelling around 1975.[23] Romania is also the official English-language spelling used by the Romanian government.[24] A handful of other languages (including Italian, Hungarian, Portuguese, and Norwegian) have also switched to "o" like English, but most languages continue to prefer forms with u, e.g. French Roumanie, German and Swedish Rumänien, Spanish Rumanía, Polish Rumunia, and Russian ??????? (Rumyniya).

Official names
1859–1862: United Principalities
1862–1866: Romanian United Principalities or Romania
1866–1881: Romania
1881–1947: Kingdom of Romania or Romania
1947–1965: Romanian People's Republic (RPR) or Romania
1965–December 1989: Socialist Republic of Romania (RSR) or Romania
December 1989–present: Romania
History
Main article: History of Romania
Early history
Map of Roman Dacia
The newly established Roman province of Dacia Trajana and the lands temporarily incorporated into Moesia province in the 110s AD

Decebalus, king of Dacia, as depicted in Cartea omului matur (1919)
The human remains found in Pe?tera cu Oase ("The Cave with Bones"), radiocarbon dated as being from circa 40,000 years ago, represent the oldest known Homo sapiens in Europe.[25][26] The Neolithic-Age Cucuteni area in northeastern Romania was the western region of the earliest European civilization, known as the Cucuteni-Trypillian culture.[27] Also the earliest known salt works in the world is at Poiana Slatinei, near the village of Lunca in Romania; it was first used in the early Neolithic, around 6050 BC, by the Starcevo culture, and later by the Cucuteni-Trypillian culture in the Pre-Cucuteni period.[28] Evidence from this and other sites indicates that the Cucuteni-Trypillian culture extracted salt from salt-laden spring water through the process of briquetage.

Prior to the Roman conquest of Dacia, the territories between the Danube and Dniester rivers were inhabited by various Thracian peoples, including the Dacians and the Getae.[29] Herodotus, in his work "Histories", notes the religious difference between the Getae and other Thracians,[30] however, according to Strabo, the Dacians and the Getae spoke the same language.[29] Dio Cassius draws attention to the cultural similarities between the two people.[29] There is a scholarly dispute whether the Dacians and the Getae were the same people.[31][32]

Roman incursions under Emperor Trajan between 101–102 AD and 105–106 AD resulted in half of the Dacian kingdom becoming a province of the Roman Empire called "Dacia Felix". The Roman rule lasted for 165 years. During this period the province was fully integrated into the Roman Empire, and a sizeable part of the population were newcomers from other provinces.[33] The Roman colonists introduced the Latin language. According to followers of the continuity theory, the intense Romanization gave birth to the Proto-Romanian language.[34][35] The province was rich in ore deposits (especially gold and silver in places like Alburnus Maior). Roman troops pulled out of Dacia around 271 AD.[36][37] The territory was later invaded by various migrating peoples.[38][39][40][41]

Burebista, Decebalus and Trajan are considered the Romanians' forefathers in Romanian historiography.[42][43][44]

Middle Ages
Main articles: Origin of the Romanians, Romania in the Early Middle Ages, and Romania in the Middle Ages

The three principalities of Wallachia, Moldavia and Transylvania under Michael the Brave.
In the Middle Ages, Romanians lived in three principalities: Wallachia (Romanian: ?ara Româneasca – "The Romanian Land"), Moldavia (Romanian: Moldova) and in Transylvania.[45] The existence of independent Romanian voivodeships in Transylvania as early as the 9th century is mentioned in Gesta Hungarorum,[46] but by the 11th century, Transylvania had become a largely autonomous part of the Kingdom of Hungary.[47] In the other parts, many small local states with varying degrees of independence developed, but only under Basarab I and Bogdan I the larger principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia would emerge in the 14th century to fight the threat of the Ottoman Empire.[48][49]


Writ issued on 14 October 1465 by Radu cel Frumos, from his residence in Bucharest, indicating Ottoman victory.
By 1541, the entire Balkan peninsula and most of Hungary had been conquered and integrated into the Ottoman Empire. By contrast, Moldavia, Wallachia, and Transylvania, while under Ottoman suzerainty, preserved partial or full internal autonomy until the mid-19th century (Transylvania until 1711[50]). This period featured several prominent rulers such as: Stephen the Great, Vasile Lupu, Alexander the Good and Dimitrie Cantemir in Moldavia; Vlad the Impaler, Mircea the Elder, Matei Basarab, Neagoe Basarab and Constantin Brâncoveanu in Wallachia; and Gabriel Bethlen in the Principality of Transylvania, as well as John Hunyadi and Matthias Corvinus in Transylvania, while it was still a part of the Kingdom of Hungary.[51][52] In 1600, all three principalities were ruled simultaneously by the Wallachian prince Michael the Brave (Mihai Viteazul), who was considered, later on, the precursor of modern Romania and became a point of reference for nationalists, as well as a catalyst for achieving a single Romanian state.[53]

Independence and monarchy
Main articles: Early Modern Romania, National awakening of Romania, United Principalities, Romanian War of Independence, and Kingdom of Romania

Changes in Romania's territory since 1859.

King Carol I of Romania
During the period of the Austro-Hungarian rule in Transylvania and of Ottoman suzerainty over Wallachia and Moldavia, most Romanians were given few rights[54] in a territory where they formed the majority of the population.[55][56] Nationalistic themes became principal during the Wallachian uprising of 1821, and the 1848 revolutions in Wallachia and Moldavia. The flag adopted for Wallachia by the revolutionaries was a blue-yellow-red horizontal tricolour (with blue above, in line with the meaning "Liberty, Justice, Fraternity"),[57] while Romanian students in Paris hailed the new government with the same flag "as a symbol of union between Moldavians and Wallachians".[58][59] The same flag, with the tricolour being mounted vertically, would later be officially adopted as the national flag of Romania.[60]

After the failed 1848 revolutions not all the Great Powers supported the Romanians' expressed desire to officially unite in a single state.[61] But in the aftermath of the Crimean War, the electors in both Moldavia and Wallachia voted in 1859 for the same leader, Alexandru Ioan Cuza, as Domnitor ("ruling prince" in Romanian), and the two principalities became a personal union formally under the suzerainty of the Ottoman Empire.[62] Following a coup d'état in 1866, Cuza was exiled and replaced with Prince Carol I of Romania of the House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen. During the 1877–1878 Russo-Turkish War Romania fought on the Russian side,[63] and in the aftermath, it was recognized as an independent state both by the Ottoman Empire and the Great Powers by the Treaty of San Stefano and the Treaty of Berlin.[64][65] The new Kingdom of Romania underwent a period of stability and progress until 1914, and also acquired Southern Dobruja from Bulgaria after the Second Balkan War.[66]

World Wars and Greater Romania
Main articles: Romania during World War I, Greater Romania, and Romania in World War II

A 1917 British map showing territories with majority Romanian populations.

Romania's territorial losses in the summer of 1940. Of these territories, only Northern Transylvania was regained.

Romanian dictator Ion Antonescu meeting with Adolf Hitler in June 1941.
Romania remained neutral for the first two years of World War I. Following the secret Treaty of Bucharest, according to which Romania would acquire territories with a majority of Romanian population from Austria-Hungary, it joined the Entente Powers and declared war on 27 August 1916.[67] After initial advances the Romanian military campaign quickly turned disastrous for Romania as the Central Powers occupied two-thirds of the country within months, before reaching a stalemate in 1917. The October Revolution and Russian withdrawal from the War left Romania alone and surrounded, and a cease fire was negotiated at Foc?ani that December. Romania was occupied and a harsh peace treaty was signed in May 1918. In November, Romania reentered the conflict. Total military and civilian losses from 1916 to 1918, within contemporary borders, were estimated at 748,000.[68] After the war, the transfer of Bukovina from Austria was acknowledged by the 1919 Treaty of Saint Germain,[69] of Banat and Transylvania from Hungary by the 1920 Treaty of Trianon,[70] and of Bessarabia from Russian rule by the 1920 Treaty of Paris.[71] All cessations made to the Central Powers in the ceasefire and treaty were nullified and renounced.[72]

The following interwar period is referred as Greater Romania, as the country achieved its greatest territorial extent at that time (almost 300,000 km2 or 120,000 sq mi).[73] The application of radical agricultural reforms and the passing of a new constitution created a democratic framework and allowed for quick economic growth. With oil production of 7.2 million tons in 1937, Romania ranked second in Europe and seventh in the world.[74][75] and was Europe's second-largest food producer.[76] However, the early 1930s were marked by social unrest, high unemployment, and strikes, as there were over 25 separate governments throughout the decade.[citation needed] On several occasions in the last few years before World War II, the democratic parties were squeezed between conflicts with the fascist and chauvinistic Iron Guard and the authoritarian tendencies of King Carol II.[77]

During World War II, Romania tried again to remain neutral, but on 28 June 1940, it received a Soviet ultimatum with an implied threat of invasion in the event of non-compliance.[78] Again foreign powers created heavy pressure on Romania, by means of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact of non-aggression from 23 August 1939. As a result of it the Romanian government and the army were forced to retreat from Bessarabia as well as from northern Bukovina in order to avoid war with the Soviet Union.[79] The king was compelled to abdicate and appointed general Ion Antonescu as the new Prime Minister with full powers in ruling the state by royal decree.[80] Romania was prompted to join the Axis military campaign. Thereafter, southern Dobruja was ceded to Bulgaria, while Hungary received Northern Transylvania as result of an Axis powers' arbitration.[81]

The Antonescu fascist regime played a major role in The Holocaust in Romania,[82] and copied the Nazi policies of oppression and genocide of Jews and Roma, mainly in the Eastern territories reoccupied by the Romanians from the Soviet Union. In total between 280,000 and 380,000 Jews in Romania (including Bessarabia, Bukovina and the Transnistria Governorate) were killed during the war[83][84] and at least 11,000 Romanian Gypsies ("Roma") were also killed.[85] In August 1944, a coup d'état led by King Michael toppled Ion Antonescu and his regime. Antonescu was convicted of war crimes and executed on 1 June 1946.[86] 9 October is now the National Day of Commemorating the Holocaust in Romania.[87]

During the Antonescu fascist regime, Romanian contribution to Operation Barbarossa was enormous, with the Romanian Army of over 1.2 million men in the summer of 1941, fighting in numbers second only to Nazi Germany.[88] Romania was the main source of oil for the Third Reich,[89] and thus became the target of intense bombing by the Allies. Growing discontent among the population eventually peaked in August 1944 with King Michael's Coup, and the country switched sides to join the Allies. It is estimated that the coup shortened the war by as much as six months.[90] Even though the Romanian Army had suffered 170,000 casualties after switching sides,[91] Romania's role in the defeat of Nazi Germany was not recognized by the Paris Peace Conference of 1947,[92] as the Soviet Union annexed Bessarabia and other territories corresponding roughly to present-day Republic of Moldova, and Bulgaria retained Southern Dobruja, but Romania did regain Northern Transylvania from Hungary.

Communism
Main article: Socialist Republic of Romania

Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej was the communist leader of Romania from 1947 until his death in 1965
During the Soviet occupation of Romania, the Communist-dominated government called for new elections in 1946, which were fraudulently won, with a fabricated 70% majority of the vote.[93] Thus they rapidly established themselves as the dominant political force.[94] Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, a Communist party leader imprisoned in 1933, escaped in 1944 to become Romania's first Communist leader. In 1947 he and others forced King Michael I to abdicate and leave the country, and proclaimed Romania a people's republic.[95][96] Romania remained under the direct military occupation and economic control of the USSR until the late 1950s. During this period, Romania's vast natural resources were continuously drained by mixed Soviet-Romanian companies (SovRoms) set up for unilateral exploitative purposes.[97][98][99]

In 1948, the state began to nationalize private firms and to collectivize agriculture.[100] Until the early 1960s, the government severely curtailed political liberties and vigorously suppressed any dissent with the help of the Securitate (the Romanian secret police). During this period the regime launched several campaigns of purges in which numerous "enemies of the state" and "parasite elements" were targeted for different forms of punishment, such as deportation, internal exile and internment in forced labour camps and prisons, sometimes for life, as well as extrajudicial killing.[101] Nevertheless, anti-Communist resistance was one of the most long-lasting in the Eastern Bloc.[102] A 2006 Commission estimated the number of direct victims of the Communist repression at two million people.[103]


Nicolae Ceau?escu ruled Romania as its Communist leader from 1965 until 1989.

The Romanian Revolution in 1989 was one of the few violent revolutions in Europe that brought an end to Communist rule.
In 1965, Nicolae Ceau?escu came to power and started to conduct the foreign policy more independently from the Soviet Union. Thus, Communist Romania was the only Warsaw Pact country who refused to participate at the Soviet-led 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia (Ceau?escu even publicly condemned the action as "a big mistake, [and] a serious danger to peace in Europe and to the fate of Communism in the world"[104]); it was also the only Communist state to maintain diplomatic relations with Israel after 1967's Six-Day War; and established diplomatic relations with West Germany the same year.[105] At the same time, close ties with the Arab countries (and the PLO) allowed Romania to play a key role in the Israel–Egypt and Israel–PLO peace talks.[106]

As Romania's foreign debt sharply increased between 1977 and 1981 (from US$3 billion to $10 billion),[107] the influence of international financial organizations (such as the IMF and the World Bank) grew, gradually conflicting with Ceau?escu's autocratic rule. The latter eventually initiated a policy of total reimbursement of the foreign debt by imposing austerity steps that impoverished the population and exhausted the economy. The process succeeded in repaying all foreign government debt of Romania in 1989. At the same time, Ceau?escu greatly extended the authority of the Securitate secret police and imposed a severe cult of personality, which led to a dramatic decrease in the dictator's popularity and culminated in his overthrow and eventual execution, together with his wife, in the violent Romanian Revolution of December 1989 in which thousands were killed or injured. The charges for which they were executed were, among others, genocide by starvation.

Contemporary period
Main article: History of Romania since 1989
After the 1989 revolution, the National Salvation Front (NSF), led by Ion Iliescu, took partial multi-party democratic and free market measures.[108][109] In April 1990, a sit-in protest contesting the results of that year's legislative elections and accusing the NSF, including Iliescu, of being made up of former Communists and members of the Securitate — rapidly grew to become what was called the Golaniad. The peaceful demonstrations degenerated into violence, prompting the intervention of coal miners summoned by Iliescu. This episode has been documented widely by both local[110] and foreign media,[111] and is remembered as the June 1990 Mineriad.[112][113]

The subsequent disintegration of the Front produced several political parties, including most notably the Social Democratic Party and the Democratic Party. The former governed Romania from 1990 until 1996 through several coalitions and governments with Ion Iliescu as head of state. Since then, there have been several other democratic changes of government: in 1996 Emil Constantinescu was elected president, in 2000 Iliescu returned to power, while Traian Basescu was elected in 2004 and narrowly re-elected in 2009.[114]

In November 2014, Sibiu mayor Klaus Iohannis was elected president, unexpectedly defeating Prime Minister Victor Ponta, who had been in the lead in the opinion polls. This surprise victory is attributed by many to the Romanian diaspora, of which almost 50 percent voted for Iohannis in the first tour, compared to 16 percent for Ponta.[115]


Romania has seen the largest anti-government protests in its history in the first half of 2017.
Former President Traian Basescu (2004–2014) has twice been impeached by the Parliament of Romania (in 2007 and in 2012), the second time on the background of street protest earlier in the year. Both times a popular referendum was called. The second time, in the Romanian presidential impeachment referendum, 2012, more than 7 million voters (88% of participants)[116] voted to oust Basescu, compared to the 5.2 million voters who initially supported him in the Romanian presidential election, 2009. However the Constitutional Court of Romania, in a split decision, invalided the outcome of the referendum, stating the turnout (46.24% by official statistics) was too low.[117] Supporters of Basescu were called upon by him and his former party to not participate in the referendum, so that it would be invalidated due to insufficient turnout.[118]

The post-1989 period is also characterized by the fact that most of the former industrial and economic enterprises which were built and operated during the Communist period have been closed, mainly as a result of the policies of privatization of the post-1989 regimes.[119] According to Valentin Mândrasescu, a Romanian-language editor of the Voice of Russia, the national petroleum company Petrom has been sold to foreigners for significantly undervalued prices.[120][121] Furthermore, other major privatizations like that of Banca Comerciala a României are criticized by opponents for being detrimental to the Romanian people.[122]

Post-1989 regimes are also criticized for allowing foreign exploitations of mineral, rare metals and gold reserves at Ro?ia Montana,[123] as well as for permitting American multinational energy giant Chevron to prospect for shale gas using the hydraulic fracking technique which has been claimed to pollute the vast underground freshwater reserves in the affected areas. Both these actions have led to significant protests by the population in 2012–2014. In November 2015, Romania's prime minister Victor Ponta resigned as massive anti-corruption protests developed in the wake of the Colectiv nightclub fire.[124]

NATO and EU integration

Romania joined NATO in 2004 and hosted its 2008 summit in Bucharest.
After the end of the Cold War, Romania developed closer ties with Western Europe and the United States, eventually joining NATO in 2004, and hosting the 2008 summit in Bucharest.[125]


Romania joined the European Union in 2007 and signed the Treaty of Lisbon.
The country applied in June 1993 for membership in the European Union and became an Associated State of the EU in 1995, an Acceding Country in 2004, and a full member on 1 January 2007.[126]

During the 2000s, Romania enjoyed one of the highest economic growth rates in Europe and has been referred at times as "the Tiger of Eastern Europe".[127] This has been accompanied by a significant improvement in living standards as the country successfully reduced internal poverty and established a functional democratic state.[128][129] However, Romania's development suffered a major setback during the late-2000s recession leading to a large gross domestic product contraction and budget deficit in 2009.[130] This led to Romania borrowing from the International Monetary Fund.[131] The worsening economic conditions led to unrest and triggered a political crisis in 2012.[132]

Romania still faces problems related to infrastructure,[133] medical services,[134] education,[135] and corruption.[136] Near the end of 2013, The Economist reported Romania again enjoying 'booming' economic growth at 4.1% that year, with wages rising fast and a lower unemployment than in Britain. Economic growth accelerated in the midst of government liberalisations in opening up new sectors to competition and investment—most notably, energy and telecoms.[137] In 2016 the Human Development Index ranked Romania as a nation of "Very High Human Development".[138]

Following the experience of economic instability throughout the 1990s, and the implementation of a free travel agreement with the EU, a great number of Romanians emigrated to Western Europe and North America, with particularly large communities in Italy and Spain. In 2008, the Romanian diaspora was estimated to be at over two million people.[139] The cyclical nature of the world economy and economic disparities between Romania and advanced European economies has fueled further emigration from the country. The emigration has caused social changes in Romania, whereby the parents would leave for Western Europe to escape poverty and provide a better standard of living for their children, who have been left behind. Some children are left to be taken care of by grandparents and relatives; and some live alone, if the parents deem them to be reasonably self-sufficient.[140] Subsequently, the youth began to be called Euro-orphans.[141]

Geography and climate
Main article: Geography of Romania

Topographic map of Romania

Moldoveanu Peak, the highest mountain of Romania

The Rodna Mountains in Maramure? County

The Danube Delta
With an area of 238,391 square kilometres (92,043 sq mi), Romania is the largest country in Southeastern Europe and the twelfth-largest in Europe.[142] It lies between latitudes 43° and 49° N and longitudes 20° and 30° E.

The terrain is distributed roughly equally between mountains, hills, and plains.

The Carpathian Mountains dominate the centre of Romania, with 14 mountain ranges reaching above 2,000 m or 6,600 ft, the highest of which is Moldoveanu Peak at 2,544 m or 8,346 ft.[142] They are surrounded by the Moldavian and Transylvanian plateaus and Carpathian Basin and Wallachian plains.

About 47% of the country's land area is covered with natural and semi-natural ecosystems.[143] There are almost 10,000 km2 (3,900 sq mi) (about 5% of the total area) of protected areas in Romania covering 13 national parks and three biosphere reserves.[144]

The Danube river forms a large part of the border with Serbia and Bulgaria, and flows into the Black Sea, forming the Danube Delta, which is the second-largest and best-preserved delta in Europe, and also a biosphere reserve and a biodiversity World Heritage Site.[145] At 5,800 km2 (2,200 sq mi),[146] the Danube Delta is the largest continuous marshland in Europe,[147] and supports 1,688 different plant species alone.[148]

Romania has one of the largest areas of undisturbed forest in Europe, covering almost 27% of the territory.[149] Some 3,700 plant species have been identified in the country, from which to date 23 have been declared natural monuments, 74 missing, 39 endangered, 171 vulnerable, and 1,253 rare.[150]

The fauna consists of 33,792 species of animals, 33,085 invertebrate and 707 vertebrate,[150] with almost 400 unique species of mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians,[151] including about 50% of Europe's (excluding Russia) brown bears[152] and 20% of its wolves.[153]

Climate
Owing to its distance from open sea and position on the southeastern portion of the European continent, Romania has a climate that is temperate and continental, with four distinct seasons. The average annual temperature is 11 °C (52 °F) in the south and 8 °C (46 °F) in the north.[154] In summer, average maximum temperatures in Bucharest rise to 28 °C (82 °F), and temperatures over 35 °C (95 °F) are fairly common in the lower-lying areas of the country.[155] In winter, the average maximum temperature is below 2 °C (36 °F).[155] Precipitation is average, with over 750 mm (30 in) per year only on the highest western mountains, while around Bucharest it drops to around 600 mm (24 in).[156] There are some regional differences: in the western parts, such as Banat, the climate is milder and has some Mediterranean influences; the eastern part of the country has a more pronounced continental climate. In Dobruja, the Black Sea also exerts an influence over the region's climate.[157]


Romania map of Köppen climate classification, according with Clima României from the Administra?ia Na?ionala de Meteorologie, Bucharest 2008
Average daily maximum and minimum temperatures for the eight largest cities in Romania[158]
Location	July (°C)	July (°F)	January (°C)	January (°F)
Bucharest	28.8/15.6	84/60	1.5/-5.5	35/22
Cluj-Napoca	24.5/12.7	76/55	0.3/-6.5	33/20
Timi?oara	27.8/14.6	82/58	2.3/-4.8	36/23
Ia?i	26.8/15	80/59	-0.1/-6.9	32/20
Constan?a	25.9/18	79/64	3.7/-2.3	39/28
Craiova	28.5/15.7	83/60	1.5/-5.6	35/22
Bra?ov	24.2/11.4	76/53	-0.1/-9.3	32/15
Gala?i	27.9/16.2	82/61	1.1/–5.3	34/22
Governance
Main articles: Politics of Romania and Government of Romania
Romania
Coat of arms of Romania
This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
Romania
Constitution[show]
Government[show]
Parliament[show]
Judiciary[show]
Political parties[show]
Elections[show]
Administrative divisions[show]
Foreign relations[show]
Politicians[show]
Other countries Atlas
v t e
The Constitution of Romania is based on the Constitution of France's Fifth Republic and was approved in a national referendum on 8 December 1991, and amended in October 2003 to bring it into conformity with the EU legislation. The country is governed on the basis of a multi-party democratic system and the separation of powers between the legislative, executive and judicial branches. It is a semi-presidential republic where executive functions are held by both government and the president.[159] The latter is elected by popular vote for a maximum of two terms of five years and appoints the prime minister, who in turn appoints the Council of Ministers. The legislative branch of the government, collectively known as the Parliament (residing at the Palace of the Parliament), consists of two chambers (Senate and Chamber of Deputies) whose members are elected every four years by simple plurality.[160][161]

The justice system is independent of the other branches of government, and is made up of a hierarchical system of courts culminating in the High Court of Cassation and Justice, which is the supreme court of Romania.[162] There are also courts of appeal, county courts and local courts. The Romanian judicial system is strongly influenced by the French model, considering that it is based on civil law and is inquisitorial in nature. The Constitutional Court (Curtea Constitu?ionala) is responsible for judging the compliance of laws and other state regulations to the constitution, which is the fundamental law of the country and can only be amended through a public referendum.[160][163] The 2007 entry into the EU has been a significant influence on its domestic policy, and including judicial reforms, increased judicial cooperation with other member states, and measures to combat corruption.

Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of Romania

Klaus Iohannis, the current President of Romania since December 2014.
Since December 1989, Romania has pursued a policy of strengthening relations with the West in general, more specifically with the United States and the European Union albeit with its limited relations with Russia. It joined the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on 29 March 2004, the European Union (EU) on 1 January 2007, while it had joined the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank in 1972, and is a founding member of the World Trade Organization.[164]

The current government has stated its goal of strengthening ties with and helping other countries (in particular Moldova, Ukraine and Georgia) with the process of integration with the rest of the West.[165] Romania has also made clear since the late 1990s that it supports NATO and EU membership for the democratic former Soviet republics in Eastern Europe and the Caucasus.[165] Romania also declared its public support for Turkey, and Croatia joining the European Union.[165] Because it has a large Hungarian minority, Romania has also developed strong relations with Hungary. Romania opted on 1 January 2007, to adhere the Schengen Area, and its bid to join was approved by the European Parliament in June 2011, but was rejected by the EU Council in September 2011.

In December 2005, President Traian Basescu and United States Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice signed an agreement that would allow a U.S. military presence at several Romanian facilities primarily in the eastern part of the country.[166] In May 2009, Hillary Clinton, US Secretary of State, declared that "Romania is one of the most trustworthy and respectable partners of the USA."[167]

Relations with Moldova are a special case, considering that the two countries share the same language and a common history.[165] A movement for unification of Romania and Moldova appeared in the early 1990s after both countries achieved emancipation from communist rule,[168] but lost ground in the mid-1990s when a new Moldovan government pursued an agenda towards preserving a Moldovan republic independent of Romania.[169] After the 2009 protests in Moldova and subsequent removal of Communists from power, relations between the two countries have improved considerably.[170]

Military
Main articles: Romanian Armed Forces and Military history of Romania
The Romanian Armed Forces consist of Land, Air, and Naval Forces, and are led by a Commander-in-chief under the supervision of the Ministry of Defense, and by the president as the Supreme Commander during wartime. The Armed Forces consist of approximately 15,000 civilians and 75,000 are military personnel—45,800 for land, 13,250 for air, 6,800 for naval forces, and 8,800 in other fields.[171] The total defence spending in 2007 accounted for 2.05% of total national GDP, or approximately US$2.9 billion, with a total of $11 billion spent between 2006 and 2011 for modernization and acquisition of new equipment.[172]


Romanian soldiers in Afghanistan during a joint operation in 2003.
The Air Force currently operates modernized Soviet MiG-21 Lancer fighters which are due to be replaced by twelve F-16s, recently purchased.[173] The Air Force purchased seven new C-27J Spartan tactical airlifters,[174] while the Naval Forces acquired two modernized Type 22 frigates from the British Royal Navy.[175]

Romania has contributed troops to the international coalition in Afghanistan since 2002,[176] with a peak deployment of 1,600 troops in 2010.[177] Its combat mission in the country concluded in 2014.[178] Romanian troops participated in the occupation of Iraq, reaching a peak of 730 soldiers before being slowly drawn down to 350 soldiers. Romania terminated its mission in Iraq and withdrew its last troops on 24 July 2009, among the last countries to do so. The Regele Ferdinand frigate participated in the 2011 military intervention in Libya.[179]

In December 2011, the Romanian Senate unanimously adopted the draft law ratifying the Romania-United States agreement signed in September of the same year that would allow the establishment and operation of a US land-based ballistic missile defence system in Romania as part of NATO's efforts to build a continental missile shield.[180]

Administrative divisions
Main article: Administrative divisions of Romania
Romania is divided into 41 counties (jude?e, pronounced judets) and the municipality of Bucharest. Each county is administered by a county council, responsible for local affairs, as well as a prefect responsible for the administration of national affairs at the county level. The prefect is appointed by the central government but cannot be a member of any political party.[181] Each county is further subdivided into cities and communes, which have their own mayor and local council. There are a total of 319 cities and 2,686 communes in Romania.[182] A total of 103 of the larger cities have municipality statuses, which gives them greater administrative power over local affairs. The municipality of Bucharest is a special case as it enjoys a status on par to that of a county. It is further divided into six sectors and has a prefect, a general mayor (primar), and a general city council.[182]

The NUTS-3 (Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics) level divisions of European Union reflect Romania's administrative-territorial structure, and correspond to the 41 counties plus Bucharest.[183] The cities and communes correspond to the NUTS-5 level divisions, but there are no current NUTS-4 level divisions. The NUTS-1 (four macroregions) and NUTS-2[184] (eight development regions) divisions exist but have no administrative capacity, and are instead used for coordinating regional development projects and statistical purposes.[183]

Romanian Counties ABARAGBCBHBNBTBVBRBZCSCLCJCTCVDBDJGLGRGJHRHDILISIFMMMHMSNTOTPHSMSJSBSVTRTMTLVSVLVNB
Development region	Area (km2)	Population (2011)[185]	Most populous urban center*[186]
Nord-Vest	34,159	2,600,132	Cluj-Napoca (411,379)
Centru	34,082	2,360,805	Bra?ov (369,896)
Nord-Est	36,850	3,302,217	Ia?i (382,484)
Sud-Est	35,762	2,545,923	Constan?a (425,916)
Sud – Muntenia	34,489	3,136,446	Ploie?ti (276,279)
Bucure?ti – Ilfov	1,811	2,272,163	Bucharest (2,272,163)
Sud-Vest Oltenia	29,212	2,075,642	Craiova (356,544)
Vest	32,028	1,828,313	Timi?oara (384,809)
Economy
Main article: Economy of Romania
Further information: Agriculture in Romania and Industry of Romania

Dacia Duster concept at the Geneva Motor Show (2009).
In 2016, Romania had a GDP (PPP) of around $441.601 billion and a GDP per capita (PPP) of $22,348.[187] According to the World Bank, Romania is an upper-middle income country economy.[188] According to Eurostat, Romania's GDP per capita (PPS) was at 59% of the EU average in 2016, an increase from 41% in 2007 (the year of Romania's accession to the EU), making Romania one of the fastest growing economies in the EU.[189]

After 1989 the country experienced a decade of economic instability and decline, led in part by an obsolete industrial base and a lack of structural reform. From 2000 onward, however, the Romanian economy was transformed into one of relative macroeconomic stability, characterized by high growth, low unemployment and declining inflation. In 2006, according to the Romanian Statistics Office, GDP growth in real terms was recorded at 7.7%, one of the highest rates in Europe.[190] However, a recession following the global financial crisis of 2008–2009 forced the government to borrow externally, including an IMF €20bn bailout program.[191] GDP has been growing by over 2% each year since.[192] According to The World Bank, the GDP per capita purchasing power parity grew from $13,442 in 2007 to an estimated $22,124 in 2015.[193] Romania still has one of the lowest net average monthly wage in the EU of €540 in 2016,[194] and an inflation of -1.1% in 2016.[195] Unemployment in Romania is at 5.4% in 2017, which is very low compared to other EU countries.[193]


Romania is part of the EU single market.
Industrial output growth reached 6.5% year-on-year in February 2013, the highest in the EU-27.[196] The largest local companies include car maker Automobile Dacia, Petrom, Rompetrol, Ford Romania, Electrica, Romgaz, RCS & RDS and Banca Transilvania.[197] Exports have increased substantially in the past few years, with a 13% annual rise in exports in 2010. Romania's main exports are cars, software, clothing and textiles, industrial machinery, electrical and electronic equipment, metallurgic products, raw materials, military equipment, pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals, and agricultural products (fruits, vegetables, and flowers). Trade is mostly centered on the member states of the European Union, with Germany and Italy being the country's single largest trading partners. The account balance in 2012 was estimated to be -4.52% of the GDP.[198]

After a series of privatizations and reforms in the late 1990s and 2000s, government intervention in the Romanian economy is somewhat lower than in other European economies.[199] In 2005, the government replaced Romania's progressive tax system with a flat tax of 16% for both personal income and corporate profit, among the lowest rates in the European Union.[200] The economy is predominantly based on services, which account for 51% of GDP, even though industry and agriculture also have significant contributions, making up 36% and 13% of GDP, respectively. Additionally, 30% of the Romanian population was employed in 2006 in agriculture and primary production, one of the highest rates in Europe.[201]

Since 2000, Romania has attracted increasing amounts of foreign investment, becoming the single largest investment destination in Southeastern and Central Europe. Foreign direct investment was valued at €8.3 billion in 2006.[202] According to a 2011 World Bank report, Romania currently ranks 72nd out of 175 economies in the ease of doing business, scoring lower than other countries in the region such as the Czech Republic.[203] Additionally, a study in 2006 judged it to be the world's second-fastest economic reformer (after Georgia).[204]

Since 1867 the official currency has been the Romanian leu ("lion") and following a denomination in 2005, it has been valued at €0.2–0.3. After joining the EU in 2007, Romania is expected to adopt the Euro sometime around 2020.[205]

At 1 July 2015, Romanian's external debt was €90.59 billion.[206]

Infrastructure
Main articles: Transport in Romania and Energy in Romania

Romania's road network.

Graph Romania electricity supply mix 2015
According to the INSSE, Romania's total road network was estimated in 2015 at 86,080 kilometres (53,488 mi).[207] The World Bank estimates the railway network at 22,298 kilometres (13,855 mi) of track, the fourth-largest railroad network in Europe.[208] Rail transport experienced a dramatic decline after 1989, and was estimated at 99 million passenger journeys in 2004; but has experienced a recent (2013) revival due to infrastructure improvements and partial privatization of lines,[160] accounting for 45% of all passenger and freight movements in the country.[160] Bucharest Metro, the only underground railway system, was opened in 1979 and measures 61.41 km (38.16 mi) with an average ridership in 2007 of 600,000 passengers during the workweek.[209] There are sixteen international commercial airports in service today, with five of them (Henri Coanda International Airport, Aurel Vlaicu International Airport, Timi?oara International Airport, Constanta International Airport and Sibiu International Airport) being capable of handling wide-body aircraft. Over 9.2 million passengers flew through Bucharest's Henri Coanda International Airport in 2015.[210]

Romania is a net exporter of electrical energy and is 48th worldwide in terms of consumption of electric energy.[211][better source needed] Around a third of the produced energy comes from renewable sources, mostly as hydroelectric power.[212] In 2015, the main sources were coal (28%), hydroelectric (30%), nuclear (18%), and hydrocarbons (14%) .[213] It has one of the largest refining capacities in Eastern Europe, even though oil and natural gas production has been decreasing for more than a decade.[211] With one of the largest reserves of crude oil and shale gas in Europe,[211] it is among the most energy-independent countries in the European Union,[214] and is looking to further expand its nuclear power plant at Cernavoda.[215]

There were almost 18,3 million connections to the Internet in June 2014.[216] According to Bloomberg, in 2013 Romania ranked 5th in the world, and according to The Independent, it ranks number one in Europe at internet speeds,[217][218] with Timi?oara ranked among the highest in the world.[219]

Tourism

Bran Castle near Bra?ov, sometimes advertised as "Dracula's Castle", is a popular attraction for tourists.
Main article: Tourism in Romania
Tourism is a significant contributor to the Romanian economy, generating around 5% of GDP.[220] According to the World Travel and Tourism Council, Romania was estimated to have the fourth-fastest-growing travel and tourism total demand in the world, with an estimated potential growth of 8% per year from 2007 to 2016.[221] The number of tourists has been steadily rising, reaching 9.33 million foreign tourists in 2016, according to the Worldbank.[222] Tourism in Romania attracted €400 million in investments in 2005.[223]

More than 60% of the foreign visitors in 2007 were from other EU countries.[224] The popular summer attractions of Mamaia and other Black Sea Resorts attracted 1.3 million tourists in 2009.[225][226] Most popular skiing resorts are along the Valea Prahovei and in Poiana Bra?ov. Castles in Transylvanian cities such as Sibiu, Bra?ov, and Sighi?oara also attract a large number of tourists. Bran Castle, near Bra?ov, is one of the most famous attractions in Romania, drawing hundreds of thousands of tourists every year as it is often advertised as being Dracula's Castle.[227]

Rural tourism, focusing on folklore and traditions, has become an important alternative,[228] and is targeted to promote such sites as Bran and its Dracula's Castle, the Painted churches of Northern Moldavia, and the Wooden churches of Maramure?.[229] Other attractions include the Danube Delta, and the Sculptural Ensemble of Constantin Brâncu?i at Târgu Jiu.[230][231]

In 2014, Romania had 32,500 companies which were active in the hotel and restaurant industry, with a total turnover of EUR 2.6 billion.[232] More than 1.9 million foreign tourists visited Romania in 2014, 12% more than in 2013.[233] According to the country's National Statistics Institute, some 77% came from Europe (particularly from Germany, Italy and France), 12% from Asia, and less than 7% from North America.[233]

Science and technology
Main articles: Science and technology in Romania and List of Romanian inventors and discoverers

Coanda-1910 was an early aircraft with ducted fan propulsion.
Historically, Romanian researchers and inventors have made notable contributions to several fields. In the history of flight, Traian Vuia made the first airplane to take off on its own power[234] and Aurel Vlaicu built and flew some of the earliest successful aircraft, while Henri Coanda discovered the Coanda effect of fluidics. Victor Babe? discovered more than 50 types of bacteria; biologist Nicolae Paulescu discovered insulin, while Emil Palade, received the Nobel Prize for his contributions to cell biology. Lazar Edeleanu was the first chemist to synthesize amphetamine and he also invented the procedure of separating valuable petroleum components with selective solvents, while Costin Neni?escu developed numerous new classes of compounds in organic chemistry. Notable mathematicians include Spiru Haret, Grigore Moisil, and ?tefan Odobleja; physicists and inventors: ?erban ?i?eica, Alexandru Proca, and ?tefan Procopiu.

During the 1990s and 2000s, the development of research was hampered by several factors, including corruption, low funding and a considerable brain drain.[235] However, since the country's accession to the European Union, this has begun to change.[236] After being slashed by 50% in 2009 because of the global recession, R&D spending was increased by 44% in 2010 and now stands at $0.5 billion (1.5 billion lei).[237] In January 2011, the Parliament also passed a law that enforces "strict quality control on universities and introduces tough rules for funding evaluation and peer review".[238] The country has joined several major international organizations such as CERN and the European Space Agency.[239][240] Overall, the situation has been characterized as "rapidly improving", albeit from a low base.[241]

The nuclear physics facility of the European Union's proposed Extreme Light Infrastructure (ELI) laser will be built in Romania.[242] In early 2012, Romania launched its first satellite from the Centre Spatial Guyanais in French Guyana.[243] Starting December 2014, Romania is a co-owner of the International Space Station.[244]

Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Romania
See also: Minorities of Romania and Romanian diaspora
Historical population
Year	Pop.	±%
1866	4,424,961	—    
1887	5,500,000	+24.3%
1899	5,956,690	+8.3%
1912	7,234,919	+21.5%
1930	18,057,028	+149.6%
1939	19,934,000	+10.4%
1941	13,535,757	-32.1%
1948	15,872,624	+17.3%
1956	17,489,450	+10.2%
1966	19,103,163	+9.2%
1977	21,559,910	+12.9%
1992	22,760,449	+5.6%
2002	21,680,974	-4.7%
2011	20,121,641	-7.2%
2016 (est.)	19,474,952	-3.2%
Figures prior to 1948 do not reflect current borders.

Ethnic map of Romania based on 2011 census data.
According to the 2011 census, Romania's population is 20,121,641.[3] Like other countries in the region, its population is expected to gradually decline in the coming years as a result of sub-replacement fertility rates and negative net migration rate. In October 2011, Romanians made up 88.9% of the population. The largest ethnic minorities are the Hungarians, 6.1% of the population, and the Roma, 3.0% of the population.[d][245] Hungarians constitute a majority in the counties of Harghita and Covasna. Other minorities include Ukrainians, Germans, Turks, Lipovans, Aromanians, Tatars, and Serbs.[246] In 1930, there were 745,421 Germans in Romania,[247] but only about 36,000 remain today.[246] As of 2009, there were also approximately 133,000 immigrants living in Romania, primarily from Moldova and China.[128]

The total fertility rate (TFR) in 2015 was estimated at 1.33 children born per woman, which is below the replacement rate of 2.1, and one of the lowest in the world.[248] In 2014, 31.2% of births were to unmarried women.[249] The birth rate (9.49‰, 2012) is much lower than the mortality rate (11.84‰, 2012), resulting in a shrinking (-0.26% per year, 2012) and aging population (median age: 39.1, 2012), with approximately 14.9% of total population aged 65 years and over.[250][251][252] The life expectancy in 2015 was estimated at 74.92 years (71.46 years male, 78.59 years female).[248]

The number of Romanians and individuals with ancestors born in Romania living abroad is estimated at around 12 million.[139] After the Romanian Revolution of 1989, a significant number of Romanians emigrated to other European countries, North America or Australia.[253] For example, in 1990, 96,919 Romanians permanently settled abroad.[254]

Languages
Main article: Romanian language
The official language is Romanian, an Eastern Romance language similar to Aromanian, Megleno-Romanian, and Istro-Romanian, but sharing many features with other Romance languages such as Italian, French, Spanish and Portuguese. (The Romanian alphabet contains the same 26 letters of the Latin, plus 5 others, totaling 31.) Romanian is spoken as a first language by 85% of the population, while Hungarian and Vlax Romani are spoken by 6.2% and 1.2% of the population, respectively. There are 25,000 native German speakers, and 32,000 Turkish speakers in Romania, as well as almost 50,000 speakers of Ukrainian,[255] concentrated in some compact regions, near the border, where they form a majority.[256] According to the Constitution, local councils ensure linguistic rights to all minorities, with localities with ethnic minorities of over 20%, that minority's language can be used in the public administration, justice system, and education. Foreign citizens and stateless persons that live in Romania have access to justice and education in their own language.[257] English and French are the main foreign languages taught in schools.[258] In 2010, the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie identifies 4,756,100 French speakers in the country.[259] According to the 2012 Eurobarometer, English is spoken by 31% of Romanians, French is spoken by 17%, and Italian by 7%.[260]

Religion

The Ia?i Metropolitan Cathedral, founded in 1833, is the largest Orthodox church in Romania.
Religion in Romania (2011 census)
Religion			Percentage	
Eastern Orthodox	
?
81.0%
Roman Catholic	
?
4.3%
Reformed	
?
3.0%
Pentecostal	
?
1.8%
Greek Catholic	
?
0.7%
Baptist	
?
0.6%
Seventh-day Adventist	
?
0.4%
Other	
?
1.8%
Non-Religious	
?
0.2%
No data	
?
6.2%
Main articles: Religion in Romania and Romanian Orthodox Church
Romania is a secular state and has no state religion. An overwhelming majority of the population identify themselves as Christians. At the country's 2011 census, 81.0% of respondents identified as Orthodox Christians belonging to the Romanian Orthodox Church. Other denominations include Protestantism (6.2%), Roman Catholicism (4.3%), and Greek Catholicism (0.8%). From the remaining population, 195,569 people belong to other Christian denominations or have another religion, which includes 64,337 Muslims (mostly of Turkish and Tatar ethnicity) and 3,519 Jewish. Moreover, 39,660 people have no religion or are atheist, whilst the religion of the rest is unknown.[261]

The Romanian Orthodox Church is an autocephalous Eastern Orthodox Church in full communion with other Orthodox churches, with a Patriarch as its leader. It is the second-largest Orthodox Church in the world[citation needed], and unlike other Orthodox churches, it functions within a Latin culture and utilizes a Romance liturgical language.[262] Its canonical jurisdiction covers the territories of Romania and Moldova,[263] with dioceses for Romanians living in nearby Serbia and Hungary, as well as diaspora communities in Central and Western Europe, North America and Oceania.

Urbanization
Main articles: List of cities and towns in Romania and Metropolitan Areas in Romania
Although 54.0% of the population lived in urban areas in 2011,[3] this percentage has been declining since 1996.[264] Counties with over ? urban population are Hunedoara, Bra?ov and Constan?a, while with less than a third are Dâmbovi?a (30.06%) and Giurgiu and Teleorman.[3] Bucharest is the capital and the largest city in Romania, with a population of over 1.8 million in 2011. Its larger urban zone has a population of almost 2.2 million,[265] which are planned to be included into a metropolitan area up to 20 times the area of the city proper.[266][267][268] Another 19 cities have a population of over 100,000, with Cluj-Napoca and Timi?oara of slightly more than 300,000 inhabitants, Ia?i, Constan?a, Craiova and Bra?ov with over 250,000 inhabitants, and Gala?i and Ploie?ti with over 200,000 inhabitants.[186] Metropolitan areas have been constituted for most of these cities.

  v t e
Largest cities in Romania
2011 Census[269]
Rank	Name	County	Pop.	Rank	Name	County	Pop.	
Bucharest
Bucharest
Cluj-Napoca
Cluj-Napoca	1	Bucharest	Bucharest	1,883,425	11	Braila	Braila	180,302	Timi?oara
Timi?oara
Ia?i
Ia?i
2	Cluj-Napoca	Cluj	324,576	12	Arad	Arad	159,704
3	Timi?oara	Timi?	319,279	13	Pite?ti	Arge?	155,383
4	Ia?i	Ia?i	290,422	14	Sibiu	Sibiu	147,245
5	Constan?a	Constan?a	283,872	15	Bacau	Bacau	144,307
6	Craiova	Dolj	269,506	16	Târgu Mure?	Mure?	134,290
7	Bra?ov	Bra?ov	253,200	17	Baia Mare	Maramure?	123,738
8	Gala?i	Gala?i	249,342	18	Buzau	Buzau	115,494
9	Ploie?ti	Prahova	209,945	19	Boto?ani	Boto?ani	106,847
10	Oradea	Bihor	196,367	20	Satu Mare	Satu Mare	102,441
Education
Main article: Romanian educational system

University of Bucharest was opened in 1864.

Illiteracy rate by county (2011). Cooler colors indicate a lower rate of illiteracy, and warmer colors indicate a higher rate of illiteracy. The national average is 1.22%.
Since the Romanian Revolution of 1989, the Romanian educational system has been in a continuous process of reform that has received mixed criticism.[270] In 2004, some 4.4 million of the population were enrolled in school. Out of these, 650,000 in kindergarten (3–6 years), 3.11 million in primary and secondary level, and 650,000 in tertiary level (universities).[271] In the same year, the adult literacy rate was 97.3% (45th worldwide), while the combined gross enrollment ratio for primary, secondary and tertiary schools was 75% (52nd worldwide).[272] Kindergarten is optional between 3 and 6 years. Since 2012, compulsory schooling starts at age 6 with the "preparatory school year" (clasa pregatitoare)[273] and is compulsory until tenth grade.[274] Primary and secondary education is divided into 12 or 13 grades. There also exists a semi-legal, informal private tutoring system used mostly during secondary school, which has prospered during the Communist regime.[275]

Higher education is aligned with the European higher education area. The results of the PISA assessment study in schools for the year 2012 placed Romania on the 45th rank out of 65 participant countries[276] and in 2016 the Romanian government released statistics showing 42% of 15-year-olds are functionally illiterate in reading.[277] though Romania often wins medals in the mathematical olympiads[278][279][280] and not only. Alexandru Ioan Cuza University of Ia?i, Babe?-Bolyai University of Cluj-Napoca, University of Bucharest, and West University of Timi?oara have been included in the QS World University Rankings' top 800.[281]

Healthcare
Main article: Healthcare in Romania
Romania has a universal health care system, and total health expenditures by the government are roughly 5% of the GDP.[282] It covers medical examinations, any surgical interventions, and any post-operator medical care, and provides free or subsidized medicine for a range of diseases. The state is obliged to fund public hospitals and clinics. The most common causes of death are cardiovascular diseases and cancer. Transmissible diseases, such as tuberculosis, syphilis or viral hepatitis, are quite common by European standards.[283] In 2010, Romania had 428 state and 25 private hospitals,[284] with 6.2 hospital beds per 1,000 people,[285] and over 200,000 medical staff, including over 52,000 doctors.[286] As of 2013, the emigration rate of doctors was 9%, higher than the European average of 2.5%.[287]

Culture

Sibiu was the European Capital of Culture in 2007.

Mihai Eminescu is the national poet of Romania and Moldova.

George Enescu was an influential Romanian composer, violinist, pianist, conductor, and teacher

Angela Gheorghiu, one of the world's foremost sopranos.
Main articles: Culture of Romania and National symbols of Romania
Arts and monuments
Main articles: Romanian literature, Cinema of Romania, Music of Romania, and List of World Heritage Sites in Romania
See also: List of films shot in Romania
The topic of the origin of the Romanians began to be discussed by the end of the 18th century among the Transylvanian School scholars.[288] Several writers rose to prominence in the 19th century, including George Co?buc, Ioan Slavici, Mihail Kogalniceanu, Vasile Alecsandri, Nicolae Balcescu, Ion Luca Caragiale, Ion Creanga, and Mihai Eminescu, the later being considered the greatest and most influential Romanian poet, particularly for the poem Luceafarul.[289] In the 20th century, Romanian artists reached international acclaim, including Tristan Tzara, Marcel Janco,[290] Mircea Eliade, Nicolae Grigorescu, Marin Preda, Liviu Rebreanu,[291] Eugène Ionesco, Emil Cioran, and Constantin Brâncu?i. The latter has a sculptural ensemble in Târgu Jiu, while his sculpture Bird in Space, was auctioned in 2005 for $27.5 million.[292][293] Romanian-born Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1986, while writer Herta Müller received the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2009.

Prominent Romanian painters include Nicolae Grigorescu, ?tefan Luchian, Ion Andreescu Nicolae Tonitza and Theodor Aman. Notable Romanian classical composers of the 19th and 20th centuries include Ciprian Porumbescu, Anton Pann, Eduard Caudella, Mihail Jora, Dinu Lipatti and especially George Enescu. The annual George Enescu Festival is held in Bucharest in honor of the 20th century emponymous composer.[294] Contemporary musicians like Angela Gheorghiu, Gheorghe Zamfir,[295][296] Inna,[297] Alexandra Stan[298] and many others have achieved various levels of international acclaim. At the Eurovision Song Contest Romanian singers have achieved third place in 2005 and 2010.[299]

In cinema, several movies of the Romanian New Wave have achieved international acclaim. At the Cannes Film Festival, 4 Months, 3 Weeks and 2 Days by Cristian Mungiu won Palme d'Or in 2007.[300] At the Berlin International Film Festival, Child's Pose by Calin Peter Netzer won the Golden Bear in 2013.[301]

The list of World Heritage Sites includes six cultural sites located within Romania, including eight Painted churches of northern Moldavia, eight Wooden Churches of Maramure?, seven Villages with fortified churches in Transylvania, the Horezu Monastery, and the Historic Centre of Sighi?oara. [302] The city of Sibiu, with its Brukenthal National Museum, was selected as the 2007 European Capital of Culture.[303] Multiple castles exist in Romania, including popular tourist attractions of Pele? Castle,[304] Corvin Castle, and "Dracula's Castle".[305]

Holidays, traditions and cuisine
See also: Romanian dress, Romanian folklore, and Romanian cuisine
There are 12 non-working public holidays, including the Great Union Day, celebrated on 1 December in commemoration of the 1918 union of Transylvania with Romania.[306] Winter holidays include the Christmas festivities and the New Year during which, various unique folklore dances and games are common: plugu?orul, sorcova, ursul, and capra.[307][308] The traditional Romanian dress that otherwise has largely fallen out of use during the 20th century, is a popular ceremonial vestment worn on these festivities, especially in the rural areas.[309] Sacrifices of live pigs during Christmas and lambs during Easter has required a special derogation from EU law after 2007.[310] During Easter, painted eggs are very common, while on 1 March features mar?i?or gifting, a tradition likely of Thracian origin.[311]

Romanian cuisine shares some similarities with other Balkan cuisines such as Greek, Bulgarian and Turkish cuisine.[312] Ciorba includes a wide range of sour soups, while mititei, mamaliga (similar to polenta), and sarmale are featured commonly in main courses.[313] Pork, chicken and beef are the preferred meats, but lamb and fish are also popular.[314] [315] Certain traditional recipes are made in direct connection with the holidays: chiftele, toba and tochitura at Christmas; drob, pasca and cozonac at Easter and other Romanian holidays.[316] ?uica is a strong plum brandy reaching a 70% alcohol content which is the country's traditional alcoholic beverage, taking as much as 75% of the national crop (Romania is one of the largest plum producers in the world).[317][318] Traditional alcoholic beverages also include wine, rachiu, palinca and vi?inata, but beer consumption has increased dramatically over the recent years.[319]

Sports
Main article: Sports in Romania

Simona Halep is currently ranked world No. 1 in singles by the Women's Tennis Association (WTA).
Association football (soccer) is the most popular sport in Romania with over 234,000 registered players as of 2010.[320] The governing body is the Romanian Football Federation, which belongs to UEFA. The Romania national football team has taken part seven times in the FIFA World Cup games and had its most successful period during the 1990s, when they reached the quarterfinals of the 1994 FIFA World Cup and was ranked third by FIFA in 1997.[321] The core player of this "Golden Generation" was Gheorghe Hagi, who was nicknamed "the Maradona of the Carpathians."[322][323] Other successful players include Nicolae Dobrin, Dudu Georgescu, Florea Dumitrache, Li?a Dumitru, Ilie Balaci, Lo?i Bölöni, Costica ?tefanescu, Cornel Dinu or Gheorghe Popescu, and most recently Adrian Mutu, Cristian Chivu, Dan Petrescu or Cosmin Contra.

The most successful club is Steaua Bucure?ti, who were the first Eastern European team to win the European Champions Cup in 1986, and were runners-up in 1989. Dinamo Bucure?ti reached the European Champions' Cup semifinal in 1984 and the Cup Winners' Cup semifinal in 1990. Other important Romanian football clubs are Rapid Bucure?ti, UTA Arad, Universitatea Craiova, CFR Cluj and Petrolul Ploie?ti.


Cristina Neagu is the only female handball player in history to win three IHF World Player of the Year awards.
Tennis is the second-most-popular sport, with over 15,000 registered players.[324] Romania reached the Davis Cup finals three times (1969, 1971, 1972). The tennis player Ilie Nastase won several Grand Slam titles, and was the first player to be ranked as number 1 by ATP between 1973 and 1974. Virginia Ruzici won the French Open in 1978, and was runner-up in 1980, Simona Halep played the final in 2014 and 2017 and is currently ranked 1st by the WTA.[325] The Romanian duo Horia Tecau and Florin Mergea won the doubles silver medal at the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.[326]

Other popular team sports are team handball,[324] basketball[327] and rugby union. Both the men's and women's handball national teams are multiple world champions. On 13 January 2010, Cristina Neagu became the first Romanian in handball to win the IHF World Player of the Year award.[328] Basketball is widely enjoyed, especially by the youth.[327] Gheorghe Mure?an was one of the two tallest players to ever play in the NBA. In 2016, Romania was chosen as a host for the 2017 EuroBasket. The rugby national team has competed in every Rugby World Cup. Popular individual sports include athletics, chess, judo, dancesport, table tennis and combat sports (Lucian Bute, Leonard Dorin Doroftei, Mihai Leu aka Michael Loewe, Daniel Ghi?a, Benjamin Adegbuyi, Andrei Stoica, etc.).[324] While it has a limited popularity nowadays, oina is a traditional Romanian sporting game similar to baseball that has been continuously practiced since at least the 14th century.[329]

Romania participated in the Olympic Games for the first time in 1900 and has taken part in 21 of the 28 summer games. It has been one of the more successful countries at the Summer Olympic Games, with a total of 307 medals won throughout the years, of which 89 gold ones, ranking 15th overall, and second (behind neighbour Hungary) of the nations that have never hosted the game. It participated at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles in defiance of a Warsaw Pact boycott and finished second in gold medals (20) and third in total medal count (53).[330] Almost a quarter of all the medals and 25 of the gold ones were won in gymnastics, with Nadia Comaneci becoming the first gymnast ever to score a perfect ten in an Olympic event at the 1976 Summer Olympics.[331] Romanian competitors have won gold medals in other Olympic sports: rowing, athletics, canoeing, wrestling, shooting, fencing, swimming, weightlifting, boxing, and judo. At the Winter Olympic Games, Romania has won only a bronze medal in bobsleigh at the 1968 Winter Olympics.

See also
Index of Romania-related articles
Outline of Romania
 Romania – Wikipedia book
Notes
Jump up ^ "am scris aceste sfente car?i de înva?aturi, sa fie popilor rumânesti ... sa în?eleaga to?i oamenii cine-s rumâni cre?tini" "Întrebare cre?tineasca" (1559), Bibliografia româneasca veche, IV, 1944, p. 6.
"... ca vazum cum toate limbile au ?i înfluresc întru cuvintele slavite a lui Dumnezeu numai noi românii pre limba nu avem. Pentru aceia cu mare munca scoasem de limba jidoveasca si greceasca si srâbeasca pre limba româneasca 5 car?i ale lui Moisi prorocul si patru car?i ?i le daruim voo fra?i rumâni ?i le-au scris în cheltuiala multa ... ?i le-au daruit voo fra?ilor români, ... ?i le-au scris voo fra?ilor români" Palia de la Ora?tie (1581–1582), Bucure?ti, 1968.
În ?ara Ardealului nu lacuiesc numai unguri, ce ?i sa?i peste seama de mul?i ?i români peste tot locul ..., Grigore Ureche, Letopise?ul ?arii Moldovei, p. 133–134.
Jump up ^ In his literary testament Ienachi?a Vacarescu writes: "Urma?ilor mei Vacare?ti!/Las voua mo?tenire:/Cre?terea limbei române?ti/?-a patriei cinstire."
In the "Istoria faptelor lui Mavroghene-Voda ?i a razmeri?ei din timpul lui pe la 1790" a Pitar Hristache writes: "Încep dupa-a mea ideie/Cu vreo câteva condeie/Povestea mavrogheneasca/Dela ?ara Româneasca.
Jump up ^ In 1816, the Greek scholar Dimitrie Daniel Philippide published in Leipzig his work The History of Romania, followed by The Geography of Romania.
On the tombstone of Gheorghe Lazar in Avrig (built in 1823) there is the inscription: "Precum Hristos pe Lazar din mor?i a înviat/A?a tu România din somn ai de?teptat."
Jump up ^ 2002 census data, based on population by ethnicity Archived 24 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine., gave a total of 535,250 Roma in Romania. Many ethnicities are not recorded, as they do not have ID cards Archived 15 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine.. International sources give higher figures than the official census (e.g., UNDP's Regional Bureau for Europe, World Bank, "International Association for Official Statistics" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 February 2008.
References
Jump up ^ "Constitution of Romania". Cdep.ro. Archived from the original on 7 September 2017. Retrieved 2 October 2013.
Jump up ^ "Reservations and Declarations for Treaty No.148 – European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages". Council of Europe. Council of Europe. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 3 December 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e "Romanian 2011 census (final results)" (PDF) (in Romanian). INSSE. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 July 2013. Retrieved 28 August 2012.
Jump up ^ "Annual official estimate" Archived 30 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine..(PDF) 2017 Revision
^ Jump up to: a b "Romania". International Monetary Fund. Archived from the original on 3 January 2018. Retrieved 8 December 2017.
Jump up ^ "Gini coefficient of equivalised disposable income (source: SILC)". Eurostat Data Explorer. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 8 February 2015.
Jump up ^ "2016 Human Development Report Romania" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2016. pp. 2–3. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 March 2017. Retrieved 22 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 November 2014. Retrieved 28 September 2014.
Jump up ^ "Romania Geography". aboutromania.com. Archived from the original on 28 March 2015. Retrieved 4 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 25 April 2017. Retrieved 24 April 2017.
Jump up ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 24 September 2017.
Jump up ^ ""Country Comparison : GDP - Real Growth Rate", CIA World Factbook, accessed 26 July 2017". Cia.gov. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017. Retrieved 26 July 2017.
Jump up ^ "Explanatory Dictionary of the Romanian Language, 1998; New Explanatory Dictionary of the Romanian Language, 2002" (in Romanian). Dexonline.ro. Archived from the original on 12 March 2008. Retrieved 25 September 2010.
Jump up ^ Verres, Andréas. Acta et Epistolae. I. p. 243. nunc se Romanos vocant
Jump up ^ Cl. Isopescu (1929). "Notizie intorno ai romeni nella letteratura geografica italiana del Cinquecento". Bulletin de la Section Historique. XVI: 1–90. ... si dimandano in lingua loro Romei ... se alcuno dimanda se sano parlare in la lingua valacca, dicono a questo in questo modo: Sti Rominest ? Che vol dire: Sai tu Romano, ...
Jump up ^ Holban, Maria (1983). Calatori straini despre ?arile Române (in Romanian). II. Ed. ?tiin?ifica ?i Enciclopedica. pp. 158–161. Anzi essi si chiamano romanesci, e vogliono molti che erano mandati quì quei che erano dannati a cavar metalli ...
Jump up ^ Cernovodeanu, Paul (1960). Voyage fait par moy, Pierre Lescalopier l'an 1574 de Venise a Constantinople, fol 48. Studii ?i materiale de istorie medievala (in Romanian). IV. p. 444. Tout ce pays la Wallachie et Moldavie et la plus part de la Transilvanie a eté peuplé des colonies romaines du temps de Traian l'empereur ... Ceux du pays se disent vrais successeurs des Romains et nomment leur parler romanechte, c'est-à-dire romain ...
Jump up ^ Ion Rotaru, Literatura româna veche, "The Letter of Neac?u from Câmpulung" Archived 9 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine., Bucure?ti, 1981, pp. 62–65
Jump up ^ Brezeanu, Stelian (1999). Romanitatea Orientala în Evul Mediu. Bucharest: Editura All Educational. pp. 229–246.
Jump up ^ Goina, Calin. How the State Shaped the Nation: an Essay on the Making of the Romanian Nation Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine. in Regio – Minorities, Politics, Society.
Jump up ^ "Wallachia and Moldavia, 1859–61". Archived from the original on 9 June 2007. Retrieved 5 January 2008.
Jump up ^ See, for example, "Rumania: Remarkable Common Ground" Archived 31 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine., The New York Times (December 21, 1989).
Jump up ^ See the Google Ngrams for Romania, Rumania, and Roumania.
Jump up ^ "General principles" (in Romanian). cdep.ro. Archived from the original on 7 September 2017. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
Jump up ^ Europe Before Rome: A Site-by-Site Tour of the Stone, Bronze, and Iron Ages (T. Douglas Price) [1] Archived 6 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Zilhão, João (2006). "Neanderthals and Moderns Mixed and It Matters". Evolutionary Anthropology. 15 (5): 183–195. doi:10.1002/evan.20110.
Jump up ^ John Noble Wilford (1 December 2009). "A Lost European Culture, Pulled From Obscurity". The New York Times (30 November 2009). Archived from the original on 31 December 2016.
Jump up ^ Gibbs, Patrick. "Antiquity Vol 79 No 306 December 2005 The earliest salt production in the world: an early Neolithic exploitation in Poiana Slatinei-Lunca, Romania Olivier Weller & Gheorghe Dumitroaia". Antiquity.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 12 October 2012.
^ Jump up to: a b c Hitchins 2014, p. 7.
Jump up ^ Herodotus. Histories, 4.93–4.97.
Jump up ^ The Cambridge Ancient History (Volume 10) (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. 1996. J. J. Wilkes mentions "the Getae of the Dobrudja, who were akin to the Dacians" (p. 562)
Jump up ^ Mócsy, András (1974). Pannonia and Upper Moesia. Routledge and Kegan Paul. ISBN 0-7100-7714-9. See p. 364, n. 41: "If there is any justification for dividing the Thracian ethnic group, then, unlike V. Georgiev who suggests splitting it into the Thraco-Getae and the Daco-Mysi, I consider a division into the Thraco-Mysi and the Daco-Getae the more likely."
Jump up ^ Hitchins 2014, pp. 13–14.
Jump up ^ Matley, Ian (1970). Romania; a Profile. Praeger. p. 85.
Jump up ^ Giurescu, Constantin C. (1972). The Making of the Romanian People and Language. Bucharest: Meridiane Publishing House. pp. 43, 98–101, 141.
Jump up ^ Eutropius, Abridgment of Roman History BOOK IX.
Jump up ^ Watkins, Thayer. "The Economic History of the Western Roman Empire". Archived from the original on 17 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008. The Emperor Aurelian recognized the realities of the military situation in Dacia and, around 271 AD., withdrew Roman troops from Dacia, leaving it to the Goths. The Lower Danube once again became the northern frontier of the Roman Empire in Eastern Europe
Jump up ^ Jordanes (551). Getica, sive, De Origine Actibusque Gothorum. Constantinople. Archived from the original on 7 October 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Iliescu, Vl.; Paschale, Chronicon (1970). Fontes Historiae Daco-Romanae. II. Bucure?ti. pp. 363, 587.
Jump up ^ Teodor, Dan Gh. (1995). Istoria României de la începuturi pâna în secolul al VIII-lea. 2. Bucure?ti. pp. 294–325.
Jump up ^ Constantine VII, Porphyrogenitus (950). Constantine Porphyrogenitus De Administrando Imperio. Constantinople. Archived from the original on 23 October 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Lup?a, Cristian (1 March 2008). "Regele Decebal" (in Romanian). Lumea-Copiilor. Archived from the original on 19 April 2015. Retrieved 13 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Împaratul Traian, stramo?ul uitat" (in Romanian). Adevarul. 4 July 2013. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 13 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mitul stramo?ilor în "epopeea na?ionala": Dacii, Columna ?i Burebista" (in Romanian). Realitatea TV. 13 April 2015. Archived from the original on 21 July 2015. Retrieved 13 April 2015.
Jump up ^ Pop, Ioan-Aurel (Winter 2001). "The Romanians' Identity in the 16th Century According to Italian Authors" (PDF). Transylvanian Review. Romanian Cultural Foundation. 10 (4): 3. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 October 2014.
Jump up ^ "Gesta Hungarorum, the chronicle of Bele Regis Notarius". Scribd.com. Archived from the original on 16 September 2010. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ Makkai, László (2001). Köpeczi, Béla, ed. "History of Transylvania: III. Transylvania in the Medieval Hungarian Kingdom (896–1526)". New York: Institute of History of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Columbia University Press. Archived from the original on 10 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ ?tefanescu, ?tefan (1991). Istoria medie a României. I. Bucharest. p. 114.
Jump up ^ Predescu, Lucian (1940). Enciclopedia Cugetarea.
Jump up ^ Várkonyi, Ágnes R. (2001). "Columbia University Press". In Köpeczi, Béla. History of Transylvania: VI. The Last Decades of the Independent Principality (1660–1711). 2. New York: Institute of History of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. Archived from the original on 30 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ István, Vásáry. "Cumans and Tatars". cambridge.org. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
Jump up ^ Copy of Domnitori Romani. Archived from the original on 10 April 2015. Retrieved 5 April 2015.
Jump up ^ Giurescu, p. 211–13. Giurescu, Constantin C. (2007) [1935]. Istoria Românilor (in Romanian). Bucharest: Editura All.
Jump up ^ David Prodan, Supplex Libellus Valachorum, Bucharest, 1948.
Jump up ^ Kocsis, Karoly; Kocsis-Hodosi, Eszter (1999). Ethnic structure of the population on the present territory of Transylvania (1880–1992). Archived from the original on 22 February 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Kocsis, Karoly; Kocsis-Hodosi, Eszter (2001). Ethnic Geography of the Hungarian Minorities in the Carpathian Basin. Simon Publications. p. 102. ISBN 1-931313-75-X.
Jump up ^ Gazeta de Transilvania, year XI, no. 34 of 26 April 1848, p. 140.
Jump up ^ Dogaru (1978), p. 862.
Jump up ^ Cazani?teanu (1967), p. 36.
Jump up ^ Nasturel (1900/1901), p. 257. Nasturel, Petre Vasiliu, Steagul, stema româna, însemnele domne?ti, trofee (The Romanian flag [and] coat of arms; the princely insignias [and] trophies), Bucharest, 1903.
Jump up ^ The establishment of the Balkan national states, 1804–1920. Books.google.com. Archived from the original on 26 June 2014. Retrieved 28 March 2012.
Jump up ^ Bobango, Gerald J (1979). The emergence of the Romanian national State. New York: Boulder. ISBN 978-0-914710-51-6.
Jump up ^ "San Stefano Preliminary Treaty" (in Russian). 1878. Archived from the original on 21 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ The Treaty of Berlin, 1878 – Excerpts on the Balkans. Internet Modern History Sourcebook. Berlin: Fordham University. 13 July 1878. Archived from the original on 8 June 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Patterson, Michelle (August 1996). "The Road to Romanian Independence". Canadian Journal of History. Archived from the original (– Scholar search) on 24 March 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Anderson, Frank Maloy; Hershey, Amos Shartle (1918). Handbook for the Diplomatic History of Europe, Asia, and Africa 1870–1914. Washington D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Jump up ^ Horne, Charles F. "Romania's Declaration of War with Austria-Hungary". Source Records of the Great War. Archived from the original on 7 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Erlikman, Vadim (2004). Poteri narodonaseleniia v XX veke : spravochnik. Moscow. ISBN 5-93165-107-1.
Jump up ^ Bernard Anthony Cook (2001). Europe Since 1945: An Encyclopedia. Taylor&Francis. p. 162. ISBN 0-8153-4057-5.
Jump up ^ "Text of the Treaty of Trianon". World War I Document Archive. Archived from the original on 4 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Malbone W. Graham (October 1944). "The Legal Status of the Bukovina and Bessarabia". The American Journal of International Law. American Society of International Law. 38 (4): 667–673. doi:10.2307/2192802. JSTOR 2192802.
Jump up ^ "World War I: The Players". www.mtholyoke.edu. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Statul National Unitar (România Mare 1919–1940)" (in Romanian). ici.ro. Archived from the original on 12 June 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "his1". Aneir-cpce.ro. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "VIDEO Înregistrare senza?ionala cu Hitler: "Fara petrolul din România nu a? fi atacat niciodata URSS-ul"". adevarul.ro. Archived from the original on 11 November 2012. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Business in Romania: a country that's fast off the Bloc – Two years of EU membership have transformed the business face of Romania and savvy UK firms are reaping the rewards. Paul Bray reports". The Daily Telegraph. London. 24 February 2010. Archived from the original on 29 May 2010. Retrieved 1 May 2010.
Jump up ^ "Post-War Romania". www.shsu.edu. Archived from the original on 9 March 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ Ioan Scurtu; Theodora Stanescu-Stanciu; Georgiana Margareta Scurtu (2002). Istoria Românilor între anii 1918–1940 (in Romanian). University of Bucharest. Archived from the original on 13 November 2007.
Jump up ^ Nagy-Talavera, Nicolas M. (1970). Green Shirts and Others: a History of Fascism in Hungary and Romania. Hoover Institution Press. p. 305. ISBN 973-9432-11-5.
Jump up ^ Ioan Scurtu; Theodora Stanescu-Stanciu; Georgiana Margareta Scurtu. "Decret regal privind investirea generalului Ion Antonescu cu depline puteri". Istoria românilor între anii 1918–1940 (in Romanian). Archived from the original on 2 October 2011. Retrieved 19 September 2011.
Jump up ^ M. Broszat (1968). "Deutschland – Ungarn – Rumänien. Entwicklung und Grundfaktoren nationalsozialistischer Hegemonial- und Bündnispolitik 1938–1941". Historische Zeitschrift (in German) (206): 552–553.
Jump up ^ Note: follow the World War II link: Ronald D. Bachman, ed. (9 November 2005). Romania:World War II (Report) (2 ed.). Washington D.C.: Library of Congress.Federal Research Division. Archived from the original on 14 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Ilie Fugaru, Romania clears doubts about Holocaust past, UPI, 11 November 2004
Jump up ^ International Commission on the Holocaust in Romania (28 January 2012). "Executive Summary: Historical Findings and Recommendations" (PDF). Final Report of the International Commission on the Holocaust in Romania. Yad Vashem (The Holocaust Martyrs' and Heroes' Remembrance Authority). Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 January 2012. Retrieved 28 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Associated, The (17 April 2012). "Study: More than 280,000 Jews killed in Romania in WWII – Haaretz Daily Newspaper | Israel News". Haaretz.com. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013. Retrieved 24 April 2012.
Jump up ^ "Ion Antonescu | ruler of Romania". Archived from the original on 20 May 2016. Retrieved 28 June 2016.
Jump up ^ "Holocaust Education, Remembrance, and Research in Romania". holocaustremembrance.com. Archived from the original on 17 April 2015. Retrieved 4 April 2015.
Jump up ^ Axworthy, Mark; Scafes, Cornel; Craciunoiu, Cristian (editors) (1995). Third axis, Fourth Ally: Romanian Armed Forces In the European War 1941–1945. London: Arms & Armour Press. pp. 1–368. ISBN 963-389-606-1.
Jump up ^ "The Biggest Mistakes in World War 2:Ploesti – the most important target". Archived from the original on 18 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Constantiniu, Florin, O istorie sincera a poporului român ("An Honest History of the Romanian People"), Ed. Univers Enciclopedic, Bucure?ti, 1997, ISBN 973-9243-07-X
Jump up ^ Clodfelter, Michael (2002). Warfare and Armed Conflicts- A Statistical Reference to Casualty and Other Figures, 1500–2000 (2 ed.). Jefferson, NC: McFarland. p. 582. ISBN 0-7864-1204-6.
Jump up ^ Tomiuc, Eugen (6 May 2005). "World War II – 60 Years After: Former Romanian Monarch Remembers Decision To Switch Sides". Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Giurescu, "«Alegeri" dupa model sovietic", p.17 (citing Berry), 18 (citing Berry and note); Macuc, p.40; Tismaneanu, p.113
Jump up ^ "Romania: Country studies – Chapter 1.7.1 "Petru Groza's Premiership"". Federal research Division, Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 14 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romania". CIA – The World Factbook. Archived from the original on 10 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romania – Country Background and Profile". ed-u.com. Archived from the original on 10 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Rîjnoveanu, Carmen (2003). "Romania's Policy of Autonomy in the Context of the Sino-Soviet Conflict" (PDF). Czech Republic Military History Institute, Militärgeschichtliches Forscheungamt. p. 1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 June 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Roper, Stephen D. (2000). Romania: The Unfinished Revolution. London: Routledge. p. 18. ISBN 90-5823-027-9.
Jump up ^ Cioroianu, Adrian (2005). On the Shoulders of Marx. An Incursion into the History of Romanian Communism (in Romanian). Bucharest: Editura Curtea Veche. pp. 68–73. ISBN 973-669-175-6.
Jump up ^ Stoica, Stan (2007). Dic?ionar de Istorie a României (in Romanian). Bucharest: Editura Merona. pp. 77–78; 233–34. ISBN 973-7839-21-8.
Jump up ^ Ioni?oiu, Cicerone (2000). Victimele terorii comuniste. Aresta?i, tortura?i, întemni?a?i, uci?i. Dic?ionar (in Romanian). Bucharest: Editura Ma?ina de scris. ISBN 973-99994-2-5.[page needed]
Jump up ^ Consiliul National pentru Studierea Ahivelor Securita?ii, Bande, bandi?i si eroi; Grupurile de rezisten?a ?i Securitatea (1948–1968), Editura Enciclopedica, Bucure?ti, 2003
Jump up ^ Raportul Comisiei Preziden?iale pentru Analiza Dictaturii Comuniste din România (Report). Comisia Preziden?iala pentru Analiza Dictaturii Comuniste din România. 15 December 2006. pp. 215–217.
Jump up ^ Political Tension 1968 (in Romanian). Bucharest: British Pathé. 21 August 1968. Archived from the original on 21 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Romania: Soviet Union and Eastern Europe". Country Studies.us. Archived from the original on 5 July 2009. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Middle East policies in Communist Romania". Country Studies.us. Archived from the original on 5 July 2009. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Deletant, Dennis. "New Evidence on Romania and the Warsaw Pact, 1955–1989" (PDF). Cold War International History Project e-Dossier Series. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Carothers, Thomas. "Romania: The Political Background" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 August 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008. This seven-year period can be characterized as a gradualistic, often ambiguous transition away from communist rule towards democracy.
Jump up ^ Hellman, Joel (January 1998). "Winners Take All: The Politics of Partial Reform in Postcommunist". Transitions World Politics. 50 (2): 203–234.
Jump up ^ "Institutul de Investigare a Crimelor Comunismului si Memoria Exilului Romanesc". mineriade.iiccr.ro. Archived from the original on 22 August 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Institutul de Investigare a Crimelor Comunismului si Memoria Exilului Romanesc". mineriade.iiccr.ro. Archived from the original on 22 August 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ Bohlen, Celestine (15 June 1990). "Evolution in Europe; Romanian miners invade Bucharest". The New York Times. Retrieved 31 August 2008. Responding to an emergency appeal by President Ion Iliescu, thousands of miners from northern Romania descended on the capital city today
Jump up ^ "Institutul de Investigare a Crimelor Comunismului si Memoria Exilului Romanesc". mineriade.iiccr.ro. Archived from the original on 22 August 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ Presa internationala despre alegerile din Romania: Traian Basescu a castigat la limita; Romanii au mici sperante sa se dezghete ajutorul de la FMI – International Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. HotNews.ro. Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "Romania profile – Leaders – BBC News-GB". Archived from the original on 17 July 2016. Retrieved 28 June 2016.
Jump up ^ "Biroul Electoral Central, rezultate". Biroul Electoral Central. 2012. Archived from the original on 15 March 2016. Retrieved 7 October 2016.
Jump up ^ "Curtea Constitutionala a invalidat referendumul cu scorul 6–3. Traian Basescu revine la Cotroceni". Hotnews. 2012. Archived from the original on 10 October 2016. Retrieved 7 October 2016.
Jump up ^ Bucharest, Ian Traynor Roberta Radu in; agencies-GB (30 July 2012). "Romania's president Basescu survives impeachment vote". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 25 February 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ Claudia POPESCU. "DEINDUSTRIALIZATION AND URBAN SHRINKAGE IN ROMANIA. WHAT LESSONS FOR THE SPATIAL POLICY?". Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 8 October 2016.
Jump up ^ "Statul român a pierdut 20 miliarde de dolari prin privatizarea Petrom". Vocea Rusiei. Archived from the original on 16 September 2016. Retrieved 27 August 2016.
Jump up ^ "Statul a oferit OMV Petrom zacaminte de 14 miliarde de dolari". www.jurnalul.ro. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 27 August 2016.
Jump up ^ "CER | Romania's Unforeseeable Turning Point". www.ce-review.org. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Romania shuts door on Gabriel's giant Rosia Montana gold mine". Financial Post. Archived from the original on 6 April 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Romania PM Ponta resigns over Bucharest nightclub fire Archived 15 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine.". BBC News. 4 November 2015.
Jump up ^ "NATO update: NATO welcomes seven new members". NATO. Archived from the original on 11 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "EU approves Bulgaria and Romania". BBC News. 26 September 2006. Archived from the original on 3 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Adevarul". Adevarul.ro. Archived from the original on 20 September 2008. Retrieved 25 September 2010.
^ Jump up to: a b Human Development Report 2009 – Country Fact Sheets – Romania Archived 1 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine.. Hdrstats.undp.org. Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Tracking the Millennium Development Goal Archived 26 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine.. MDG Monitor. Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Joe Parkinson (4 December 2009). "Romania Faces Crucial Vote". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 10 July 2017.
Jump up ^ Romania and the IMF Archived 9 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Gheorghe Stoica; Lavinia Stan. "Romanian Politics in 2012: Intra-Cabinet Coexistence and Political Instability". South-East European Journal of Political Science. Archived from the original on 24 February 2014.
Jump up ^ "Romania's Infrastructure and International Transport Links". Assessment of the Romanian Economy. Romania Central. Archived from the original on 21 March 2009. Retrieved 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Romania, world's 53rd country in quality of life index « Denisa Morariu[dead link]. Denisamorariu.wordpress.com (8 January 2010). Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Sistemul de invatamant distrus de lipsa reformelor – Cluj Archived 5 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine.. citynews.ro. Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ D+C 2010/03 – Focus – Roos: In Romania and Bulgaria, civil-society organisations are demanding rule of law – Development and Cooperation – International Journal Archived 9 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine.. Inwent.org. Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "Romania is booming". The Economist. 17 December 2013. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017.
Jump up ^ "Human Development Report 2016 – "Human Development for Everyone"" (PDF). HDRO (Human Development Report Office) United Nations Development Programme. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 August 2017. Retrieved 22 March 2017.
^ Jump up to: a b "Romania". Germany: focus-migration.de. Archived from the original on 7 February 2009. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Thorpe, Nick (2 January 2014). "EU migration: Romania's absent parents". BBC. Archived from the original on 17 July 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2016.
Jump up ^ Schmitt, Caroline (27 November 2014). "Mothering via Skype: Europe's absentee parents". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 23 April 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2016.
^ Jump up to: a b "Geography, Meteorology and Environment" (PDF) (in Romanian). Romanian Statistical Yearbook. 2004. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
Jump up ^ "Romania's Biodiversity". Ministry of Waters, Forests and Environmental Protection of Romania (via enrin.grida.no). Archived from the original on 10 February 2008. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Protected Areas in Romania". Romanian Ministry of Waters, Forests and Environmental Protection (via envir.ee). Archived from the original on 17 November 2007. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Danube Delta". UNESCO's World Heritage Centre. Archived from the original on 27 January 2008. Retrieved 9 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Danube Delta Reserve Biosphere". Romanian Ministry of Waters, Forests and Environmental Protection (via envir.ee). Archived from the original on 26 April 2005. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Danube Delta". UNESCO's World Heritage Centre. Archived from the original on 27 January 2008. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ Wohl, Ellen (2010). A World of Rivers: Environmental Change on Ten of the World's Great Rivers. University of Chicago Press. p. 130. ISBN 0-226-90478-4. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015 – via Google Books.
Jump up ^ "Romania". Fao.org. Archived from the original on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b "Flora si fauna salbatica" (in Romanian). enrin.grida.no. Archived from the original on 23 February 2009. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
Jump up ^ "EarthTrends: Biodiversity and Protected Areas – Romania" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 September 2007. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Bears. Status Survey and Conservation Action Plan" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 2 October 2014.
Jump up ^ "Canids: Foxes, Wolves, Jackals and Dogs. Status Survey and Conservation Action Plan" (PDF). IUCN/SSC Canid Specialist Group. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 2 October 2014.
Jump up ^ "Romania: Climate". U.S. Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 23 September 2006. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b "Permafrost Monitoring and Prediction in Southern Carpathians, Romania". CliC International Project Office (CIPO). 22 December 2004. Archived from the original on 16 May 2011. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "The 2004 Yearbook" (PDF) (in Romanian). Romanian National Institute of Statistics. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Clima Romaniei | Site-ul Administratiei Nationale de Meteorologie Archived 22 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Klimatafel von Rumänien". Baseline climate means (1961–1990) from stations all over the world (in German). Deutscher Wetterdienst. Archived from the original on 24 July 2015. Retrieved 20 December 2016.
Jump up ^ Verheijen, Tony (14 March 1990). "Oxford Scholarship Online: Semi-Presidentialism in Europe". Oxfordscholarship.com. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Romania. The Europa World Year Book. 2 (48 ed.). London and New York: Routledge. 2007. pp. 3734–3759. ISBN 978-1-85743-412-5.
Jump up ^ "Se schimba sistemul de vot. Deputa?ii au adoptat noua Lege Electorala propusa de USL". Antena3.ro. Archived from the original on 31 October 2012. Retrieved 12 October 2012.
Jump up ^ "Presentation". High Court of Cassation and Justice -—Romania. Archived from the original on 10 September 2012. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romanian Legal system". CIA Factbook. 2000. Archived from the original on 25 January 2008. Retrieved 11 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Understanding the WTO – members". WTO. Archived from the original on 17 January 2010. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b c d "Foreign Policy Priorities of Romania for 2008" (in Romanian). Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 14 September 2008. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Background Note: Romania – U.S.-Romanian Relations". U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 8 April 2008.
Jump up ^ [2] Archived 12 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Gabriel Andreescu; Valentin Stan; Renate Weber (30 October 1994). "Romania'S Relations with the Republic of Moldova". International Studies. Centre for International Studies. Archived from the original on 23 February 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Ihrig, Stefan. "Rediscovering History, Rediscovering Ultimate Truth" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 October 2008. Retrieved 17 September 2008.
Jump up ^ "Moldova, Romania open new chapter in bilateral relations". People's Daily. 29 April 2010. Archived from the original on 18 May 2013. Retrieved 11 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Press conference" (Press release). Ministry of National Defense of Romania. 21 January 2003. Archived from the original on 3 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "MoND Budget as of 2007" (in Romanian). Ziarul Financiar. 30 October 2006. Archived from the original on 22 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romania Finally Settles On Portuguese F-16s" Archived 6 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "PICTURES: Romania accepts first C-27J Spartans-12/04/2010-London". Flightglobal.com. Archived from the original on 15 April 2010. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
Jump up ^ "Spartan Order". Aviation Week & Space Technology. 11 December 2006.
Jump up ^ "Romania: 2 soldiers killed, 1 injured in Afghanistan". Colorado Springs Gazette. Associated Press. 7 May 2016. Archived from the original on 17 August 2016. Retrieved 7 July 2016.
Jump up ^ "Romania To Send 450 More Troops To Afghanistan". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 21 December 2014. Archived from the original on 19 September 2016. Retrieved 7 July 2016.
Jump up ^ "Romania ends combat mission in Afghanistan with visit from Prime Minister". Associated Press. 30 June 2014. Archived from the original on 14 October 2017. Retrieved 7 July 2016.
Jump up ^ "Traian Basescu: Romania va trimite fregata Regele Ferdinand cu 205 militari in Mediterana pentru operatiuni de blocare a oricarei nave suspecte ca transporta armament" (in Romanian). HotNews.ro. 22 March 2011. Archived from the original on 25 March 2011. Retrieved 22 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Romania ratifies US missile shield agreement". SpaceWar. 6 December 2012. Archived from the original on 2 February 2013.
Jump up ^ "Geografia Romaniei" (in Romanian). descopera.net. Archived from the original on 19 February 2009. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
^ Jump up to: a b "1.8". Administrative Organisation of Romanian Territory, on December 31, 2005 (PDF) (Report) (in Romanian). Romanian National Institute of Statistics. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b "Hierarchical list of the Nomenclature of territorial units for statistics – NUTS and the Statistical regions of Europe". Archived from the original on 18 January 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "LEGE nr. 151 din 15 iulie 1998" (in Romanian). Archived from the original on 2 December 2013. Retrieved 1 July 2012.
Jump up ^ "2011 Regions Population". INSSE. 4 July 2013. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013. Retrieved 9 July 2013.
^ Jump up to: a b "Population at 20 October 2011" (in Romanian). INSSE. 5 July 2013. Retrieved 5 July 2013.[dead link]
Jump up ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 21 April 2017., IMF World Economic Outlook Database, April 2017
Jump up ^ World Bank – Data for Romania 2016 Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "GDP per capita, consumption per capita and price level indices". Archived from the original on 2 July 2017. Retrieved 13 June 2017.
Jump up ^ "GDP in 2006" (PDF) (in Romanian). Romanian National Institute of Statistics. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 February 2008. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ nytimes.com: "Romania to Get Next Installment of Bailout" 1 Nov 2010 Archived 31 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Veste excelenta pentru Romania de la Banca Mondiala (Video)". Archived from the original on 18 June 2014. Retrieved 11 June 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b "In January 2017, the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was estimated at 5.4%" (PDF) (Press release). National Institute of Statistics. 31 January 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 March 2017. Retrieved 9 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "Average gross earnings in Romania" (PDF). 16 March 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "Eurostat, HICP – monthly data (12-month average rate of change)". Eurostat. Archived from the original on 5 March 2017. Retrieved 5 March 2017.
Jump up ^ Industrial production up by 0.4% in euro area and EU27|Eurostat. Eurostat (12 April 2013). Retrieved on 13 May 2013.
Jump up ^ Chirileasa, Andrei (9 June 2014). "Top 20 companies in Romania by turnover". Romania-Insider.com. Archived from the original on 12 June 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "IMF World Economic Outlook Database, April 2011 – Central and Eastern Europe". IMF. April 2011. Archived from the original on 15 October 2011. Retrieved 27 April 2011.
Jump up ^ "Index of Economic Freedom: Romania". heritage.org. Archived from the original on 5 January 2005. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Taxation trends in the EU (PDF) (Report). Eurostat. 26 June 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romania". CIA World Factbook. 2010. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011. Retrieved 27 April 2011.
Jump up ^ "Romania: FDI reached over EUR 8.3 bn". Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Economy Ranking. Doing Business (Report). World Bank. 2007. Archived from the original on 15 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Doing Business 2007 Report (Report). World Bank. Archived from the original on 8 March 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Fifth Report on the Practical Preparations for the Future Enlargement of the Euro Area" (PDF). Commission of the European Communities. 16 July 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 October 2007. Retrieved 31 May 2013.
Jump up ^ "Banca Na?ionala a României". bnr.ro. Archived from the original on 30 September 2015. Retrieved 29 September 2015.
Jump up ^ "Length of roads in Romania 2015" (PDF). INSSE. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 November 2016. Retrieved 16 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "Reteaua feroviara" (in Romanian). cfr.to. Archived from the original on 8 June 2009. Retrieved 6 September 2009.
Jump up ^ "Metrorex ridership" (in Romanian). Financial Week newspaper. 23 April 2007. Archived from the original on 16 May 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Ann.aero database Archived 26 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Jump up to: a b c [[[List of countries by electricity consumption]] "List of countries by electricity consumption"] Check |url= value (help). Retrieved 20 February 2017.
Jump up ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 December 2015. Retrieved 9 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Raport Anual 2015 energie" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 20 February 2017.
Jump up ^ Ana Hontz-Ward. "Romania Expects to be Energy Independent Despite Ukraine Crisis". Voanews.com. Archived from the original on 18 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Contractul pentru unitatile 3 si 4 de la centrala nucleara Cernavoda se va parafa in mai. Chinezii v-or avea 51% din actiuni – Nicolae Moga (PSD) – Energie – HotNews.ro". Economie.hotnews.ro. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Numarul conexiunilor la internet a crescut cu 22,8%. Câte milioane de români au acces la internet". Gândul. 4 December 2014. Archived from the original on 9 April 2015.
Jump up ^ • Chart: Blistering BroadBand: Europe's fastest downloaders -> Statista Archived 22 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Top 10: Where to Find the World's Fastest Internet". Bloomberg. 23 January 2013. Archived from the original on 28 June 2016.
Jump up ^ "Romanian city comes out first in the world in Internet download speed ranking". Net Index. 3 July 2013. Archived from the original on 6 July 2013.
Jump up ^ "Country/Economy Profiles: Romania, Page 329 Travel&Tourism" (PDF). World Economic Forum. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 April 2013. Retrieved 16 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "WTTC spells out policy recommendations for Romania to tap travel and tourism potential". WTTC. Retrieved 11 January 2008.[dead link]
Jump up ^ "Worldbank Tourism in Romania". worldbank.org. Archived from the original on 25 August 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Tourism attracted in 2005 investments worth €400 million" (in Romanian). Gandul Newspaper. Retrieved 11 January 2008.[dead link]
Jump up ^ Report from Romanian National Institute of Statistics (PDF) (Report). Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 February 2008. Retrieved 11 January 2008. for the first 9 months of 2007 an increase from the previous year of 8.7% to 16.5 million tourists; of these 94.0% came from European countries and 61.7% from EU
Jump up ^ Criza ne strica vacan?a Archived 2 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine., 9 July 2010, jurnalul.ro, accessed on 21 August 2010
Jump up ^ "Tan and fun at the Black Sea". UnseenRomania. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Castelul Bran, marcat de istorie, dar si de legenda lui Dracula atrage anual sute de mii de turisti". www.digi24.ro. Archived from the original on 22 August 2016. Retrieved 28 June 2016.
Jump up ^ "Turismul renaste la tara" (in Romanian). Romania Libera. 5 July 2008. Archived from the original on 2 August 2008. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Bine ati venit pe site-ul de promovare a pensiunilor agroturistice din Romania !!!" (in Romanian). RuralTourism.ro. Archived from the original on 14 September 2008. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Turism in Romania". Turism.ro. Archived from the original on 2 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Ansamblul sculptural Constantin Brancusi din Targu Jiu". Romaniaturistica.com. 16 March 1957. Archived from the original on 9 September 2012. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ How important is tourism in Romania’s economy? Archived 6 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Jump up to: a b Over 1.9 million tourists visit Romania, where do they come from – Romania Insider Archived 4 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Traian Vuia in a Century of Aviation". Romanian Academy Library. p. 1. Archived from the original on 27 July 2013. Retrieved 7 August 2012.
Jump up ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 9 February 2011.
Jump up ^ "Laserul de la Magurele: Institutul de Cercetare pentru Fizica si Inginerie Nucleara a semnat contractul de 66 milioane euro pentru realizarea Sistemului Fascicul Gamma – Esential". HotNews.ro. Archived from the original on 11 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Bulgaria: Science fortunes of Balkan neighbours diverge – Novinite.com – Sofia News Agency". Novinite.com. 13 January 2011. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Science fortunes of Balkan neighbours diverge : Nature News". Nature.com. Archived from the original on 16 January 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Funeriu: Stiinta din Romania 'se imbunatateste', insa mai sunt multe lucruri de facut". Epochtimes-romania.com. 13 January 2011. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Romania is to sign agreement on joining European space agency convention". Actmedia.eu. 20 January 2011. Archived from the original on 24 January 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Romania's high hopes for science : Nature News". Nature.com. Archived from the original on 19 March 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "ELI-NP | Extreme Light Infrastructure – Nuclear Physics". Eli-np.ro. Archived from the original on 6 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "VIDEO Romania's first satellite Goliat successfully launch from Kourou base in French Guyana – Top News". HotNews.ro. Archived from the original on 6 April 2014. Retrieved 4 April 2014.
Jump up ^ "Romania will own a part of the International Space Station and will contribute to the development of the latest European rocket, Ariane 6". Romanian Space Agency. 3 December 2014. Archived from the original on 8 December 2014.
Jump up ^ "European effort spotlights plight of the Roma". usatoday. 10 February 2005. Archived from the original on 23 January 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b Official site of the results of the 2002 Census (Report) (in Romanian). Archived from the original on 5 February 2012. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "German Population of Romania, 1930–1948". hungarian-history.hu. Archived from the original on 17 August 2007. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
^ Jump up to: a b The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency Archived 24 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Eurostat – Tables, Graphs and Maps Interface (TGM) table Archived 27 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Villeret, Graeme. "Roumanie". PopulationData.net. Archived from the original on 15 March 2016. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Romania demographics profile (2011)". Indexmundi.com. 12 July 2011. Archived from the original on 8 November 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "CIA World Factbook: Romania". Cia.gov. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013. Retrieved 2 October 2013.
Jump up ^ "Focus-Migration: Romania". focus-migration.hwwi.de (in German). Archived from the original on 20 July 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ MIGRATION AND ASYLUM IN CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE Archived 16 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine. European Parliament
Jump up ^ "2011 census results by native language" (xls). www.recensamantromania.ro, website of the Romanian Institute of Statistics. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 5 May 2015.
Jump up ^ "IARNA UCRAINEANA – Afla care sunt localita?ile din Maramure? în care se praznuiesc sarbatorile de iarna dupa rit vechi" [Ukrainian winter: find out in which communes of Maramure? are the Winter holidays celebrated by the old calendar], Infomm.ro, archived from the original on 18 May 2015, retrieved 5 May 2015
Jump up ^ "Constitutia României". Cdep.ro. Archived from the original on 7 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Two-thirds of working age adults in the EU28 in 2011 state they know a foreign language" (PDF). Eurostat. 26 September 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 September 2013. Retrieved 21 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Roumanie – Organisation internationale de la Francophonie". francophonie.org. Archived from the original on 14 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "EUROPEANS AND THEIR LANGUAGES, REPORT" (PDF). Eurostat. 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 21 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "2011 census results by religion" (xls). www.recensamantromania.ro, website of the Romanian Institute of Statistics. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 5 May 2015.
Jump up ^ Profiles of the Eastern Churches Archived 29 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine. at cnewa.org
Jump up ^ European Court of Human Rights – Case of Metropolitan Church of Bessarabia Archived 30 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Urbanization of Romania: how urban population increased from 3.7 million in 1948 to 12 million in 1989". Businessday.ro. Archived from the original on 22 April 2014. Retrieved 24 April 2012.
Jump up ^ "Urban Audit". Urban Audit. Archived from the original on 31 May 2013. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Proiect – Zona metropolitana Bucuresti". Zmb.ro. Archived from the original on 2 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Metropolitan Zone of Bucharest will be ready in 10 years" (in Romanian). Romania Libera. Archived from the original on 3 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Official site of Metropolitan Zone of Bucharest Project" (in Romanian). Archived from the original on 2 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Population at 20 October 2011" (in Romanian). INSSE. 5 July 2013. Retrieved 5 July 2013.
Jump up ^ The Romanian Educational Policy in Transition (Report). UNESCO. Archived from the original on 2 October 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romanian Institute of Statistics Yearbook – Chapter 8" (PDF) (in Romanian). Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 August 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "UN Human Development Report 2006" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 February 2007.
Jump up ^ Clasa pregatitoare, obligatorie din septembrie. Ce vor învata copiii si cum vor fi evaluati – Mediafax Archived 26 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ The Romanian Educational Policy in Transition (Report). UNESCO. Archived from the original on 1 October 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Limited relevants. What feminists can learn from the eastern experience" (PDF). genderomania.ro. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2008. Retrieved 25 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Rezultate PISA 2012: Aproape 40% dintre elevii romani au dificultati sa citeasca si sa inteleaga un text si pot rezolva doar exercitii de baza la Matematica (Report). Hotnews.ro. 3 December 2013. Archived from the original on 9 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Over 40pct of Romania's children struggling with functional literacy | Nine O`Clock". www.nineoclock.ro-US. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 21 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Romania's brains rank first in Europe, 10th in the world after Math Olympiad" (in Romanian). romania-insider.com. 16 July 2012. Archived from the original on 18 July 2012.
Jump up ^ "Romanian students win four medals, two gold, at the European Girls Mathematical Olympiad". business-review.eu. 16 April 2014. Archived from the original on 9 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Romanian students win 32 medals at SEEMOUS International Mathematical Olympiad". AGERPRES. 11 March 2014. Archived from the original on 8 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "QS World University Rankings 2013". topuniversities.com. October 2013. Archived from the original on 21 October 2016. All four universities are ranked at 700+ which means they are ranked among the 701–800 places.
Jump up ^ "Ritli: Ministry of Health budget for 2012 can provide the assistance at least at the level of previous year" Archived 24 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine., Mediafax.ro
Jump up ^ "Romania, 4th in Europe in TB" Archived 24 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine., România Libera
Jump up ^ "Our patients vs. theirs: How many hospitals has Romania compared to other EU countries", Wall-Street.ro
Jump up ^ "Fewer hospital beds for sick Romanians" Archived 5 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine., România Libera
Jump up ^ "Personalul medico-sanitar pe categorii, forme de proprietate, sexe, macroregiuni, regiuni de dezvoltare ?i jude?e" Archived 23 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine., Institutul Na?ional de Statistica
Jump up ^ "«De profesie: medic în România». Cum încearca ministrul Nicolaescu sa-i ?ina pe doctori în ?ara" Archived 1 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine., Adevarul, 2 April 2013
Jump up ^ "Cultural aspects". National Institute for Research & Development in Informatics, Romania. Archived from the original on 7 March 2008. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Mihai Eminescu" (in Romanian). National Institute for Research & Development in Informatics, Romania. Archived from the original on 31 December 2007. Retrieved 20 January 2008.
Jump up ^ Tom Sandqvist, DADA EAST: The Romanians of Cabaret Voltaire, London MIT Press, 2006.
Jump up ^ ?tefanescu, Alex. (1999). Nichita Stanescu, The Angel with a Book in His Hands (in Romanian). Ma?ina de scris. p. 8. ISBN 978-973-99297-4-5.
Jump up ^ "Brancusi's 'Bird in Space' Sets World Auction Record for Sculpture at $27,456,000". Antiques and the Arts Online. Archived from the original on 13 February 2006. Retrieved 20 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "November 9, The price record for a Brancusi masterpiece was set up in 2005 when "Bird in Space" was sold for USD 27.5 M". Romanian Information Center in Brussels. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 20 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "George Enescu, the composer". International Enescu Society. Archived from the original on 19 October 2007. Retrieved 20 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Sounds Like Canada feat. Gheorghe Zamfir". CBC Radio. 17 January 2006. Archived from the original on 28 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Gheorghe Zamfir, master of the pan pipe". Gheorghe Zamfir, Official Homepage. Archived from the original on 30 October 2007. Retrieved 20 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Inna Biography". BBC. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2013.
Jump up ^ "10 One-Hit Wonders to Be or Not to Be?". vh1.i. 7 March 2014. Archived from the original on 13 March 2014.
Jump up ^ Arsenie, Dan. "Paula Seling despre rezultatul la Eurovision 2010: "Mai bine de atât nu se putea!"". EVZ.ro. Archived from the original on 28 August 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Cannes 2007 Winners". Alternative Film Guide. Archived from the original on 4 July 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Mike Collett-White (16 February 2013). "Romanian film "Child's Pose" wins Berlin Golden Bear". Reuters. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015.
Jump up ^ "World Heritage Site – Romania". UNESCO. Archived from the original on 31 October 2004. Retrieved 31 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Report on the Nominations from Luxembourg and Romania for the European Capital of Culture 2007" (PDF). The Selection Panel for the European Capital of Culture (ECOC) 2007. 5 April 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Muzeul National Peles | Site-ul oficial al castelelor Peles si Pelisor". Peles.ro. Archived from the original on 28 August 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Castelul Bran". Viaromania.eu. Archived from the original on 8 October 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Public holidays enacted by labour code" Archived 18 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine., Labor code, 22 March 2017
Jump up ^ Improve It Grup S.R.L. "Traditii si obiceiuri romanesti. Artizanat traditional romanesc. Arta populara". Traditii.ro. Archived from the original on 3 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ Insider, Romania (21 December 2012). "Winter holidays and Christmas traditions in Romania: the Bear dance, the Masked carolers and the Goat". Romania-Insider.com. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "ROMANIA – Traditions and Folklore – Official Travel and Tourism Information". Romaniatourism.com. Archived from the original on 23 July 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Ministrul Agriculturii: UE accepta ca mieii de Pasti si porcii de Craciun sa fie sacrificati in mod traditional – Actualitate". HotNews.ro. 11 August 2014. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ Martisor, a Spring celebration for Eastern Europeans (29 June 2014). "Martisor, a Spring celebration for Eastern Europeans". Foreigners In Uk. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Christina Bradatan, Cuisine and Cultural Identity in Balkans". Scholarworks.iu.edu. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ Recipes, Gourmet European. "Romanian Recipes – like mom used to make". www.gourmet-european-recipes.com-gb. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "28 Romanian Foods The Whole World Should Know – oneJive". onejive.com-US. Archived from the original on 12 August 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Retete traditionale Moldova: retete peste sau cu carne de porc". Bucataras.ro. 15 December 2008. Archived from the original on 5 January 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Bucatarie romaneasca – Cultura si retete – Articole". Gastronomie.ele.ro. Archived from the original on 30 April 2007. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "?uica production consumed 75% of Romanian plums in 2003". Regard-est.com. Archived from the original on 29 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Study in Romania". Educations.com. 5 February 2008. Archived from the original on 28 December 2010. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Beer consumption per capita in 2008". kirinholdings.co.jp. Retrieved 17 March 2017.[permanent dead link]
Jump up ^ "Topul sporturilor în func?ie de numarul de sportivi legitima?i". zf.ro. 12 January 2012. Archived from the original on 9 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Romania: FIFA/Coca-Cola World Ranking". FIFA.com. Archived from the original on 3 July 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Hagi leaves Romania post". BBC Sport. 26 November 2001. Archived from the original on 22 January 2003. Retrieved 31 August 2008. Hagi earned a legendary status in Romania where he spearheaded the 'Golden Generation' of players ...
Jump up ^ "Hagi snubs Maradona". BBC Sport Online. 6 April 2001. Archived from the original on 19 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b c "Romania". The Europa World Year Book. 2. Routledge. 2007.
Jump up ^ Rankings | WTA Tennis English Archived 12 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Rio 2016 – Tennis: Mergea and Tecau win silver in men's doubles tournament", Agerpres, 13 August 2016, archived from the original on 19 August 2017, retrieved 25 August 2016
^ Jump up to: a b "What's the most popular sport in Romania?". cesport.eu. Archived from the original on 6 August 2016. Retrieved 29 May 2016.
Jump up ^ "Cristina Neagu – World Handball Player of the Year 2010". Ihf.info. 13 January 2011. Archived from the original on 2 December 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2014.
Jump up ^ "Originea jocului de Oina – Sport National Roman". Oina.ro. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Recurs la ISTORIE: De ce s-a "prabu?it" România la Olimpiada de la Londra?". adevarul.ro. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ Herman, Robin (28 March 1976). "Gymnast Posts Perfect Mark". New York Times. Archived from the original on 22 November 2008. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Sources
Primary sources
The Ancient History of Herodotus (Translated by William Beloe) (1859). Derby & Jackson.
Eutropius, Abridgment of Roman History (Translated by John Selby Watson) (1886). George Bell and Sons.
Secondary sources
Hitchins, Keith (2014). A Concise History of Romania. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-87238-6.
Pohl, Walter (2013). "National origin narratives in the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy". In Geary, Patrick J.; Klaniczay, Gábor. Manufacturing Middle Ages: Entangled History of Medievalism in Nineteenth-Century Europe. BRILL. pp. 13–50. ISBN 978-90-04-24487-0.
External links
Find more about
Romania
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity
Country Profile from BBC News.
Romania Article and Country Profile from Encyclopædia Britannica
Romania Profile from Balkan Insight.
"Romania". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
Romania information from the United States Department of State.
Portals to the World from the United States Library of Congress.
Romania at UCB Libraries GovPubs.
Romania at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
 Wikimedia Atlas of Romania
 Geographic data related to Romania at OpenStreetMap
Key Development Forecasts for Romania from International Futures.
Romanian Law and Miscellaneous – English
Government
Romanian Presidency
Romanian Parliament
Culture and history links
Treasures of the national library of Romania
Historic Houses of Romania


[hide] v t e
Romania articles
Topics
History	
Timeline Prehistoric Romania Dacia Roman Dacia Early Middle Ages Middle Ages Early Modern Era National awakening United Principalities Kingdom World War I Greater Romania World War II Communist Romania Revolution Since 1989
Geography	
Cities Climate Counties Earthquakes Fauna Flora Islands Lakes Mountains Protected areas Rivers Topography
Politics	
Administrative divisions Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT LGBT history Judiciary Law enforcement Military Parliament Political parties Unification with Moldova
Economy	
Agriculture Energy Exports Foreign investment Foreign trade Industry automotive construction mining petrochemical Leu (currency) National Bank Property bubble Science and technology Services Stock Exchange Telecommunications Tourism Transport
Society	
Crime Demographics Education Healthcare Immigration Languages Minorities Hungarians in Romania Public holidays Religion Romanians Social structure Urban planning Welfare
Culture	
Academy Architecture Art Cinema Cuisine Folklore Humour Literature Media Music Philosophy Sport
Outline Index
Book Category Portal Commons page Commons
[show] v t e
Sovereign states and dependencies of Europe
Terra.pngGeography portal Europe green light.pngEurope portal Flag of Europe.svgEuropean Union portal Flag of NATO.svgNATO portal
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 124251001 LCCN: n79049551 GND: 4050939-4 SUDOC: 026400030 BNF: cb11865467h (data) HDS: 3369 NDL: 00569801
Categories: Romania1859 establishments in EuropeBalkan countriesLiberal democraciesMember states of NATOMember states of the Council of EuropeMember states of the European UnionMember states of the Union for the MediterraneanMember states of the United NationsRepublicsRomance countries and territoriesRomanian-speaking countries and territoriesStates and territories established in 1859
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikinews
Wikiquote
Wikivoyage
Languages
Acèh
????????
????????
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
????
Ænglisc
???????
Aragonés
?????
Armãneashti
Arpetan
Asturianu
Avañe'?
????
Aymar aru
Az?rbaycanca
??????
?????
Bân-lâm-gú
?????????
??????????
?????????? (???????????)?
???????
Bikol Central
Bislama
?????????
Boarisch
???????
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
??????
Català
???????
Cebuano
Ceština
Chavacano de Zamboanga
ChiShona
ChiTumbuka
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Davvisámegiella
Deitsch
Deutsch
??????????
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
????????
Emiliàn e rumagnòl
??????
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
E?egbe
?????
Fiji Hindi
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Fulfulde
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gagauz
Gàidhlig
Galego
???????
?????? ?????? / Gõychi Konknni
???/Hak-kâ-ngî
??????
???
Hausa
Hawai?i
???????
??????
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Igbo
Ilokano
????????????? ???????
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
????
Íslenska
Italiano
?????
Basa Jawa
Kalaallisut
?????
Kapampangan
????????-???????
???????
Kaszëbsczi
???????
Kernowek
Kinyarwanda
Kiswahili
????
Kongo
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî
????????
Ladino
?????
?????
???
Latgalu
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuviu
Ligure
Limburgs
Lingála
Livvinkarjala
La .lojban.
Lumbaart
Magyar
??????????
Malagasy
??????
Malti
Maori
?????
?????????
????
????????
Bahasa Melayu
Mìng-de?ng-ng?¯
Mirandés
???????
????????????
??????
??????????
Nahuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
Nedersaksies
??????
????? ????
???
Napulitano
???????
Nordfriisk
Norfuk / Pitkern
Norsk
Norsk nynorsk
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
???? ?????
?????
Oromoo
O?zbekcha/???????
??????
????
Pangasinan
??????
Papiamentu
????
Patois
????? ????
Picard
Piemontèis
Tok Pisin
Plattdüütsch
Polski
???t?a??
Português
Qaraqalpaqsha
Qirimtatarca
Româna
Romani
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
??????????
???????
???? ????
Gagana Samoa
Sardu
Scots
Seeltersk
Sesotho
Shqip
Sicilianu
?????
Simple English
SiSwati
Slovencina
Slovenšcina
?????????? / ??????????
Slunski
Soomaaliga
?????
Sranantongo
?????? / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / ??????????????
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
?????
Taqbaylit
Tarandíne
???????/tatarça
??????
Tetun
???
????
??????
???
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Twi
??????
??????????
????
???????? / Uyghurche
Vèneto
Vepsän kel’
Ti?ng Vi?t
Volapük
Võro
Walon
??
West-Vlams
Winaray
Wolof
??
??????
Yorùbá
Romania
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Romania (disambiguation).
Coordinates: 46°N 25°E

Romania
România  (Romanian)
Flag of Romania
Flag
Coat of arms of Romania
Coat of arms
Anthem: De?teapta-te, române!
'"Awaken thee, Romanian!"

MENU0:00
Location of  Romania  (dark green)– in Europe  (green & dark grey)– in the European Union  (green)  –  [Legend]
Location of  Romania  (dark green)
– in Europe  (green & dark grey)
– in the European Union  (green)  –  [Legend]

Capital
and largest city	Bucharest
44°25'N 26°06'E
Official languages	Romanian[1]
Recognised minority
languages[2]	
Albanian Armenian Bulgarian Czech Croatian German Greek Italian Macedonian Hungarian Polish Romani Russian Rusyn Serbian Slovak Tatar Turkish Ukrainian Yiddish
Ethnic groups (2011[3])	
88.9% Romanians
6.1% Hungarians
3.0% Roma
0.2% Ukrainians
0.2% Germans
Demonym	Romanian
Government	Unitary semi-presidential
republic
• President
Klaus Iohannis
• Prime Minister
Mihai Tudose
Legislature	Parliament
• Upper house
Senate
• Lower house
Chamber of Deputies
Formation
• Kingdom of Dacia
168 BC
• Roman conquest
106
• Migration Period
275 – 10th century
• First Romanian polities
10th century – 1330
• Principality of Wallachia
1330
• Principality of Moldavia
1346
• Principality of Transylvania
1570
• First union under Michael the Brave
1600
• United Principalitiesa
24 January 1859
• Independence from
the Ottoman Empire
9 May 1877 / 1878b
• Kingdom of Romania
14 March 1881
• Great Unionc
1 December 1918d
Area
• Total
238,397 km2 (92,046 sq mi) (81st)
• Water (%)
3
Population
• 2017 estimate
19,638,000 Decrease[4] (59th)
• 2011 census
20,121,641[3] (58th)
• Density
84.4/km2 (218.6/sq mi) (117th)
GDP (PPP)	2018 estimate
• Total
$474.032 billion[5] (42nd)
• Per capita
$25,533 (61st)
GDP (nominal)	2018 estimate
• Total
$204.943 billion[5] (49th)
• Per capita
$11,817 (67th)
Gini (2013)	Steady 34[6]
medium
HDI (2015)	Increase 0.802[7]
very high · 50th
Currency	Romanian Leu (RON)
Time zone	EET (UTC+2)
• Summer (DST)
EEST (UTC+3)
Date format	dd.mm.yyyy (AD)
Drives on the	right
Calling code	+40
Patron saint	Saint Andrew
ISO 3166 code	RO
Internet TLD	.roe
The double election of Alexandru Ioan Cuza in Moldavia and Wallachia (respectively, 5 and 24 January 1859).
Independence proclaimed on 9 May 1877, internationally recognised in 1878.
The union of Romania with Bessarabia, Bukovina and Transylvania in 1918.
Monarchy was abolished on 30 December 1947 upon the proclamation of the People's Republic and was changed with the new constitution upon its adoption on 21 August 1965 as the Socialist Republic. The Communist regime fell on 22 December 1989, the new democratic government was installed on 20 May 1990 and the new post-communist constitution was adopted on 21 November 1991. Romania joined the European Union on 1 January 2007.
Also .eu, shared with other European Union member states.
Romania (/ro?'me?ni?/ (About this sound listen) roh-MAY-nee-?; Romanian: România Listeni[rom?'ni.a]) is a sovereign state located in Southeastern Europe. It borders the Black Sea, Bulgaria, Ukraine, Hungary, Serbia, and Moldova. It has an area of 238,397 square kilometres (92,046 sq mi) and a temperate-continental climate. With almost 20 million inhabitants, the country is the seventh most populous member state of the European Union. Its capital and largest city, Bucharest, is the sixth-largest city in the EU, with 1,883,425 inhabitants as of 2011.[8]

The River Danube, Europe's second-longest river, rises in Germany and flows in a general southeast direction for 2,857 km (1,775 mi), coursing through ten countries before emptying into Romania's Danube Delta. The Carpathian Mountains, which cross Romania from the north to the southwest, include Moldoveanu, at 2,544 m (8,346 ft).[9]

Modern Romania was formed in 1859 through a personal union of the Danubian Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia. The new state, officially named Romania since 1866, gained independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1877. At the end of World War I, Transylvania, Bukovina and Bessarabia united with the sovereign Kingdom of Romania. During World War II, Romania was an ally of Nazi Germany against the Soviet Union, fighting side by side with the Wehrmacht until 1944, when it joined the Allied powers and faced occupation by the Red Army forces. Romania lost several territories, of which Northern Transylvania was regained after the war. Following the war, Romania became a socialist republic and member of the Warsaw Pact. After the 1989 Revolution, Romania began a transition towards democracy and a capitalist market economy.

Romania is a developing country and one of the poorest in the European Union, ranking 50th in the Human Development Index,[10][11] although as of 2017 its economy is growing at an estimated annual rate of 5%, tied with Malta for the highest in the EU.[12] Following rapid economic growth in the early 2000s, Romania has an economy predominantly based on services, and is a producer and net exporter of machines and electric energy, featuring companies like Automobile Dacia and OMV Petrom. It has been a member of NATO since 2004, and part of the European Union since 2007. A strong majority of the population identify themselves as Eastern Orthodox Christians and are native speakers of Romanian, a Romance language. The cultural history of Romania is often referred to when dealing with influential artists, musicians, inventors, and sportspeople.

Contents  [hide] 
1	Etymology
1.1	Official names
2	History
2.1	Early history
2.2	Middle Ages
2.3	Independence and monarchy
2.4	World Wars and Greater Romania
2.5	Communism
2.6	Contemporary period
2.7	NATO and EU integration
3	Geography and climate
3.1	Climate
4	Governance
4.1	Foreign relations
4.2	Military
4.3	Administrative divisions
5	Economy
5.1	Infrastructure
5.2	Tourism
5.3	Science and technology
6	Demographics
6.1	Languages
6.2	Religion
6.3	Urbanization
6.4	Education
6.5	Healthcare
7	Culture
7.1	Arts and monuments
7.2	Holidays, traditions and cuisine
7.3	Sports
8	See also
9	Notes
10	References
11	Sources
11.1	Primary sources
11.2	Secondary sources
12	External links
12.1	Government
12.2	Culture and history links
Etymology
Main article: Name of Romania
Romania derives from the Latin romanus, meaning "citizen of Rome".[13] The first known use of the appellation was attested in the 16th century by Italian humanists travelling in Transylvania, Moldavia, and Wallachia.[14][15][16][17]


Neac?u's letter from 1521, the oldest surviving document written in Romanian.
The oldest known surviving document written in Romanian, a 1521 letter known as the "Letter of Neac?u from Câmpulung",[18] is also notable for including the first documented occurrence of the country's name: Wallachia is mentioned as ?eara Rumâneasca (old spelling for "The Romanian Land"; ?eara from the Latin terra, "land"; current spelling: ?ara Româneasca).

Two spelling forms: român and rumân were used interchangeably[a] until sociolinguistic developments in the late 17th century led to semantic differentiation of the two forms: rumân came to mean "bondsman", while român retained the original ethnolinguistic meaning.[19] After the abolition of serfdom in 1746, the word rumân gradually fell out of use and the spelling stabilised to the form român.[b] Tudor Vladimirescu, a revolutionary leader of the early 19th century, used the term Rumânia to refer exclusively to the principality of Wallachia."[20]

The use of the name Romania to refer to the common homeland of all Romanians—its modern-day meaning—was first documented in the early 19th century.[c] The name has been officially in use since 11 December 1861.[21]

In English, the name of the country was formerly spelt Rumania or Roumania.[22] Romania became the predominant spelling around 1975.[23] Romania is also the official English-language spelling used by the Romanian government.[24] A handful of other languages (including Italian, Hungarian, Portuguese, and Norwegian) have also switched to "o" like English, but most languages continue to prefer forms with u, e.g. French Roumanie, German and Swedish Rumänien, Spanish Rumanía, Polish Rumunia, and Russian ??????? (Rumyniya).

Official names
1859–1862: United Principalities
1862–1866: Romanian United Principalities or Romania
1866–1881: Romania
1881–1947: Kingdom of Romania or Romania
1947–1965: Romanian People's Republic (RPR) or Romania
1965–December 1989: Socialist Republic of Romania (RSR) or Romania
December 1989–present: Romania
History
Main article: History of Romania
Early history
Map of Roman Dacia
The newly established Roman province of Dacia Trajana and the lands temporarily incorporated into Moesia province in the 110s AD

Decebalus, king of Dacia, as depicted in Cartea omului matur (1919)
The human remains found in Pe?tera cu Oase ("The Cave with Bones"), radiocarbon dated as being from circa 40,000 years ago, represent the oldest known Homo sapiens in Europe.[25][26] The Neolithic-Age Cucuteni area in northeastern Romania was the western region of the earliest European civilization, known as the Cucuteni-Trypillian culture.[27] Also the earliest known salt works in the world is at Poiana Slatinei, near the village of Lunca in Romania; it was first used in the early Neolithic, around 6050 BC, by the Starcevo culture, and later by the Cucuteni-Trypillian culture in the Pre-Cucuteni period.[28] Evidence from this and other sites indicates that the Cucuteni-Trypillian culture extracted salt from salt-laden spring water through the process of briquetage.

Prior to the Roman conquest of Dacia, the territories between the Danube and Dniester rivers were inhabited by various Thracian peoples, including the Dacians and the Getae.[29] Herodotus, in his work "Histories", notes the religious difference between the Getae and other Thracians,[30] however, according to Strabo, the Dacians and the Getae spoke the same language.[29] Dio Cassius draws attention to the cultural similarities between the two people.[29] There is a scholarly dispute whether the Dacians and the Getae were the same people.[31][32]

Roman incursions under Emperor Trajan between 101–102 AD and 105–106 AD resulted in half of the Dacian kingdom becoming a province of the Roman Empire called "Dacia Felix". The Roman rule lasted for 165 years. During this period the province was fully integrated into the Roman Empire, and a sizeable part of the population were newcomers from other provinces.[33] The Roman colonists introduced the Latin language. According to followers of the continuity theory, the intense Romanization gave birth to the Proto-Romanian language.[34][35] The province was rich in ore deposits (especially gold and silver in places like Alburnus Maior). Roman troops pulled out of Dacia around 271 AD.[36][37] The territory was later invaded by various migrating peoples.[38][39][40][41]

Burebista, Decebalus and Trajan are considered the Romanians' forefathers in Romanian historiography.[42][43][44]

Middle Ages
Main articles: Origin of the Romanians, Romania in the Early Middle Ages, and Romania in the Middle Ages

The three principalities of Wallachia, Moldavia and Transylvania under Michael the Brave.
In the Middle Ages, Romanians lived in three principalities: Wallachia (Romanian: ?ara Româneasca – "The Romanian Land"), Moldavia (Romanian: Moldova) and in Transylvania.[45] The existence of independent Romanian voivodeships in Transylvania as early as the 9th century is mentioned in Gesta Hungarorum,[46] but by the 11th century, Transylvania had become a largely autonomous part of the Kingdom of Hungary.[47] In the other parts, many small local states with varying degrees of independence developed, but only under Basarab I and Bogdan I the larger principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia would emerge in the 14th century to fight the threat of the Ottoman Empire.[48][49]


Writ issued on 14 October 1465 by Radu cel Frumos, from his residence in Bucharest, indicating Ottoman victory.
By 1541, the entire Balkan peninsula and most of Hungary had been conquered and integrated into the Ottoman Empire. By contrast, Moldavia, Wallachia, and Transylvania, while under Ottoman suzerainty, preserved partial or full internal autonomy until the mid-19th century (Transylvania until 1711[50]). This period featured several prominent rulers such as: Stephen the Great, Vasile Lupu, Alexander the Good and Dimitrie Cantemir in Moldavia; Vlad the Impaler, Mircea the Elder, Matei Basarab, Neagoe Basarab and Constantin Brâncoveanu in Wallachia; and Gabriel Bethlen in the Principality of Transylvania, as well as John Hunyadi and Matthias Corvinus in Transylvania, while it was still a part of the Kingdom of Hungary.[51][52] In 1600, all three principalities were ruled simultaneously by the Wallachian prince Michael the Brave (Mihai Viteazul), who was considered, later on, the precursor of modern Romania and became a point of reference for nationalists, as well as a catalyst for achieving a single Romanian state.[53]

Independence and monarchy
Main articles: Early Modern Romania, National awakening of Romania, United Principalities, Romanian War of Independence, and Kingdom of Romania

Changes in Romania's territory since 1859.

King Carol I of Romania
During the period of the Austro-Hungarian rule in Transylvania and of Ottoman suzerainty over Wallachia and Moldavia, most Romanians were given few rights[54] in a territory where they formed the majority of the population.[55][56] Nationalistic themes became principal during the Wallachian uprising of 1821, and the 1848 revolutions in Wallachia and Moldavia. The flag adopted for Wallachia by the revolutionaries was a blue-yellow-red horizontal tricolour (with blue above, in line with the meaning "Liberty, Justice, Fraternity"),[57] while Romanian students in Paris hailed the new government with the same flag "as a symbol of union between Moldavians and Wallachians".[58][59] The same flag, with the tricolour being mounted vertically, would later be officially adopted as the national flag of Romania.[60]

After the failed 1848 revolutions not all the Great Powers supported the Romanians' expressed desire to officially unite in a single state.[61] But in the aftermath of the Crimean War, the electors in both Moldavia and Wallachia voted in 1859 for the same leader, Alexandru Ioan Cuza, as Domnitor ("ruling prince" in Romanian), and the two principalities became a personal union formally under the suzerainty of the Ottoman Empire.[62] Following a coup d'état in 1866, Cuza was exiled and replaced with Prince Carol I of Romania of the House of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen. During the 1877–1878 Russo-Turkish War Romania fought on the Russian side,[63] and in the aftermath, it was recognized as an independent state both by the Ottoman Empire and the Great Powers by the Treaty of San Stefano and the Treaty of Berlin.[64][65] The new Kingdom of Romania underwent a period of stability and progress until 1914, and also acquired Southern Dobruja from Bulgaria after the Second Balkan War.[66]

World Wars and Greater Romania
Main articles: Romania during World War I, Greater Romania, and Romania in World War II

A 1917 British map showing territories with majority Romanian populations.

Romania's territorial losses in the summer of 1940. Of these territories, only Northern Transylvania was regained.

Romanian dictator Ion Antonescu meeting with Adolf Hitler in June 1941.
Romania remained neutral for the first two years of World War I. Following the secret Treaty of Bucharest, according to which Romania would acquire territories with a majority of Romanian population from Austria-Hungary, it joined the Entente Powers and declared war on 27 August 1916.[67] After initial advances the Romanian military campaign quickly turned disastrous for Romania as the Central Powers occupied two-thirds of the country within months, before reaching a stalemate in 1917. The October Revolution and Russian withdrawal from the War left Romania alone and surrounded, and a cease fire was negotiated at Foc?ani that December. Romania was occupied and a harsh peace treaty was signed in May 1918. In November, Romania reentered the conflict. Total military and civilian losses from 1916 to 1918, within contemporary borders, were estimated at 748,000.[68] After the war, the transfer of Bukovina from Austria was acknowledged by the 1919 Treaty of Saint Germain,[69] of Banat and Transylvania from Hungary by the 1920 Treaty of Trianon,[70] and of Bessarabia from Russian rule by the 1920 Treaty of Paris.[71] All cessations made to the Central Powers in the ceasefire and treaty were nullified and renounced.[72]

The following interwar period is referred as Greater Romania, as the country achieved its greatest territorial extent at that time (almost 300,000 km2 or 120,000 sq mi).[73] The application of radical agricultural reforms and the passing of a new constitution created a democratic framework and allowed for quick economic growth. With oil production of 7.2 million tons in 1937, Romania ranked second in Europe and seventh in the world.[74][75] and was Europe's second-largest food producer.[76] However, the early 1930s were marked by social unrest, high unemployment, and strikes, as there were over 25 separate governments throughout the decade.[citation needed] On several occasions in the last few years before World War II, the democratic parties were squeezed between conflicts with the fascist and chauvinistic Iron Guard and the authoritarian tendencies of King Carol II.[77]

During World War II, Romania tried again to remain neutral, but on 28 June 1940, it received a Soviet ultimatum with an implied threat of invasion in the event of non-compliance.[78] Again foreign powers created heavy pressure on Romania, by means of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact of non-aggression from 23 August 1939. As a result of it the Romanian government and the army were forced to retreat from Bessarabia as well as from northern Bukovina in order to avoid war with the Soviet Union.[79] The king was compelled to abdicate and appointed general Ion Antonescu as the new Prime Minister with full powers in ruling the state by royal decree.[80] Romania was prompted to join the Axis military campaign. Thereafter, southern Dobruja was ceded to Bulgaria, while Hungary received Northern Transylvania as result of an Axis powers' arbitration.[81]

The Antonescu fascist regime played a major role in The Holocaust in Romania,[82] and copied the Nazi policies of oppression and genocide of Jews and Roma, mainly in the Eastern territories reoccupied by the Romanians from the Soviet Union. In total between 280,000 and 380,000 Jews in Romania (including Bessarabia, Bukovina and the Transnistria Governorate) were killed during the war[83][84] and at least 11,000 Romanian Gypsies ("Roma") were also killed.[85] In August 1944, a coup d'état led by King Michael toppled Ion Antonescu and his regime. Antonescu was convicted of war crimes and executed on 1 June 1946.[86] 9 October is now the National Day of Commemorating the Holocaust in Romania.[87]

During the Antonescu fascist regime, Romanian contribution to Operation Barbarossa was enormous, with the Romanian Army of over 1.2 million men in the summer of 1941, fighting in numbers second only to Nazi Germany.[88] Romania was the main source of oil for the Third Reich,[89] and thus became the target of intense bombing by the Allies. Growing discontent among the population eventually peaked in August 1944 with King Michael's Coup, and the country switched sides to join the Allies. It is estimated that the coup shortened the war by as much as six months.[90] Even though the Romanian Army had suffered 170,000 casualties after switching sides,[91] Romania's role in the defeat of Nazi Germany was not recognized by the Paris Peace Conference of 1947,[92] as the Soviet Union annexed Bessarabia and other territories corresponding roughly to present-day Republic of Moldova, and Bulgaria retained Southern Dobruja, but Romania did regain Northern Transylvania from Hungary.

Communism
Main article: Socialist Republic of Romania

Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej was the communist leader of Romania from 1947 until his death in 1965
During the Soviet occupation of Romania, the Communist-dominated government called for new elections in 1946, which were fraudulently won, with a fabricated 70% majority of the vote.[93] Thus they rapidly established themselves as the dominant political force.[94] Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, a Communist party leader imprisoned in 1933, escaped in 1944 to become Romania's first Communist leader. In 1947 he and others forced King Michael I to abdicate and leave the country, and proclaimed Romania a people's republic.[95][96] Romania remained under the direct military occupation and economic control of the USSR until the late 1950s. During this period, Romania's vast natural resources were continuously drained by mixed Soviet-Romanian companies (SovRoms) set up for unilateral exploitative purposes.[97][98][99]

In 1948, the state began to nationalize private firms and to collectivize agriculture.[100] Until the early 1960s, the government severely curtailed political liberties and vigorously suppressed any dissent with the help of the Securitate (the Romanian secret police). During this period the regime launched several campaigns of purges in which numerous "enemies of the state" and "parasite elements" were targeted for different forms of punishment, such as deportation, internal exile and internment in forced labour camps and prisons, sometimes for life, as well as extrajudicial killing.[101] Nevertheless, anti-Communist resistance was one of the most long-lasting in the Eastern Bloc.[102] A 2006 Commission estimated the number of direct victims of the Communist repression at two million people.[103]


Nicolae Ceau?escu ruled Romania as its Communist leader from 1965 until 1989.

The Romanian Revolution in 1989 was one of the few violent revolutions in Europe that brought an end to Communist rule.
In 1965, Nicolae Ceau?escu came to power and started to conduct the foreign policy more independently from the Soviet Union. Thus, Communist Romania was the only Warsaw Pact country who refused to participate at the Soviet-led 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia (Ceau?escu even publicly condemned the action as "a big mistake, [and] a serious danger to peace in Europe and to the fate of Communism in the world"[104]); it was also the only Communist state to maintain diplomatic relations with Israel after 1967's Six-Day War; and established diplomatic relations with West Germany the same year.[105] At the same time, close ties with the Arab countries (and the PLO) allowed Romania to play a key role in the Israel–Egypt and Israel–PLO peace talks.[106]

As Romania's foreign debt sharply increased between 1977 and 1981 (from US$3 billion to $10 billion),[107] the influence of international financial organizations (such as the IMF and the World Bank) grew, gradually conflicting with Ceau?escu's autocratic rule. The latter eventually initiated a policy of total reimbursement of the foreign debt by imposing austerity steps that impoverished the population and exhausted the economy. The process succeeded in repaying all foreign government debt of Romania in 1989. At the same time, Ceau?escu greatly extended the authority of the Securitate secret police and imposed a severe cult of personality, which led to a dramatic decrease in the dictator's popularity and culminated in his overthrow and eventual execution, together with his wife, in the violent Romanian Revolution of December 1989 in which thousands were killed or injured. The charges for which they were executed were, among others, genocide by starvation.

Contemporary period
Main article: History of Romania since 1989
After the 1989 revolution, the National Salvation Front (NSF), led by Ion Iliescu, took partial multi-party democratic and free market measures.[108][109] In April 1990, a sit-in protest contesting the results of that year's legislative elections and accusing the NSF, including Iliescu, of being made up of former Communists and members of the Securitate — rapidly grew to become what was called the Golaniad. The peaceful demonstrations degenerated into violence, prompting the intervention of coal miners summoned by Iliescu. This episode has been documented widely by both local[110] and foreign media,[111] and is remembered as the June 1990 Mineriad.[112][113]

The subsequent disintegration of the Front produced several political parties, including most notably the Social Democratic Party and the Democratic Party. The former governed Romania from 1990 until 1996 through several coalitions and governments with Ion Iliescu as head of state. Since then, there have been several other democratic changes of government: in 1996 Emil Constantinescu was elected president, in 2000 Iliescu returned to power, while Traian Basescu was elected in 2004 and narrowly re-elected in 2009.[114]

In November 2014, Sibiu mayor Klaus Iohannis was elected president, unexpectedly defeating Prime Minister Victor Ponta, who had been in the lead in the opinion polls. This surprise victory is attributed by many to the Romanian diaspora, of which almost 50 percent voted for Iohannis in the first tour, compared to 16 percent for Ponta.[115]


Romania has seen the largest anti-government protests in its history in the first half of 2017.
Former President Traian Basescu (2004–2014) has twice been impeached by the Parliament of Romania (in 2007 and in 2012), the second time on the background of street protest earlier in the year. Both times a popular referendum was called. The second time, in the Romanian presidential impeachment referendum, 2012, more than 7 million voters (88% of participants)[116] voted to oust Basescu, compared to the 5.2 million voters who initially supported him in the Romanian presidential election, 2009. However the Constitutional Court of Romania, in a split decision, invalided the outcome of the referendum, stating the turnout (46.24% by official statistics) was too low.[117] Supporters of Basescu were called upon by him and his former party to not participate in the referendum, so that it would be invalidated due to insufficient turnout.[118]

The post-1989 period is also characterized by the fact that most of the former industrial and economic enterprises which were built and operated during the Communist period have been closed, mainly as a result of the policies of privatization of the post-1989 regimes.[119] According to Valentin Mândrasescu, a Romanian-language editor of the Voice of Russia, the national petroleum company Petrom has been sold to foreigners for significantly undervalued prices.[120][121] Furthermore, other major privatizations like that of Banca Comerciala a României are criticized by opponents for being detrimental to the Romanian people.[122]

Post-1989 regimes are also criticized for allowing foreign exploitations of mineral, rare metals and gold reserves at Ro?ia Montana,[123] as well as for permitting American multinational energy giant Chevron to prospect for shale gas using the hydraulic fracking technique which has been claimed to pollute the vast underground freshwater reserves in the affected areas. Both these actions have led to significant protests by the population in 2012–2014. In November 2015, Romania's prime minister Victor Ponta resigned as massive anti-corruption protests developed in the wake of the Colectiv nightclub fire.[124]

NATO and EU integration

Romania joined NATO in 2004 and hosted its 2008 summit in Bucharest.
After the end of the Cold War, Romania developed closer ties with Western Europe and the United States, eventually joining NATO in 2004, and hosting the 2008 summit in Bucharest.[125]


Romania joined the European Union in 2007 and signed the Treaty of Lisbon.
The country applied in June 1993 for membership in the European Union and became an Associated State of the EU in 1995, an Acceding Country in 2004, and a full member on 1 January 2007.[126]

During the 2000s, Romania enjoyed one of the highest economic growth rates in Europe and has been referred at times as "the Tiger of Eastern Europe".[127] This has been accompanied by a significant improvement in living standards as the country successfully reduced internal poverty and established a functional democratic state.[128][129] However, Romania's development suffered a major setback during the late-2000s recession leading to a large gross domestic product contraction and budget deficit in 2009.[130] This led to Romania borrowing from the International Monetary Fund.[131] The worsening economic conditions led to unrest and triggered a political crisis in 2012.[132]

Romania still faces problems related to infrastructure,[133] medical services,[134] education,[135] and corruption.[136] Near the end of 2013, The Economist reported Romania again enjoying 'booming' economic growth at 4.1% that year, with wages rising fast and a lower unemployment than in Britain. Economic growth accelerated in the midst of government liberalisations in opening up new sectors to competition and investment—most notably, energy and telecoms.[137] In 2016 the Human Development Index ranked Romania as a nation of "Very High Human Development".[138]

Following the experience of economic instability throughout the 1990s, and the implementation of a free travel agreement with the EU, a great number of Romanians emigrated to Western Europe and North America, with particularly large communities in Italy and Spain. In 2008, the Romanian diaspora was estimated to be at over two million people.[139] The cyclical nature of the world economy and economic disparities between Romania and advanced European economies has fueled further emigration from the country. The emigration has caused social changes in Romania, whereby the parents would leave for Western Europe to escape poverty and provide a better standard of living for their children, who have been left behind. Some children are left to be taken care of by grandparents and relatives; and some live alone, if the parents deem them to be reasonably self-sufficient.[140] Subsequently, the youth began to be called Euro-orphans.[141]

Geography and climate
Main article: Geography of Romania

Topographic map of Romania

Moldoveanu Peak, the highest mountain of Romania

The Rodna Mountains in Maramure? County

The Danube Delta
With an area of 238,391 square kilometres (92,043 sq mi), Romania is the largest country in Southeastern Europe and the twelfth-largest in Europe.[142] It lies between latitudes 43° and 49° N and longitudes 20° and 30° E.

The terrain is distributed roughly equally between mountains, hills, and plains.

The Carpathian Mountains dominate the centre of Romania, with 14 mountain ranges reaching above 2,000 m or 6,600 ft, the highest of which is Moldoveanu Peak at 2,544 m or 8,346 ft.[142] They are surrounded by the Moldavian and Transylvanian plateaus and Carpathian Basin and Wallachian plains.

About 47% of the country's land area is covered with natural and semi-natural ecosystems.[143] There are almost 10,000 km2 (3,900 sq mi) (about 5% of the total area) of protected areas in Romania covering 13 national parks and three biosphere reserves.[144]

The Danube river forms a large part of the border with Serbia and Bulgaria, and flows into the Black Sea, forming the Danube Delta, which is the second-largest and best-preserved delta in Europe, and also a biosphere reserve and a biodiversity World Heritage Site.[145] At 5,800 km2 (2,200 sq mi),[146] the Danube Delta is the largest continuous marshland in Europe,[147] and supports 1,688 different plant species alone.[148]

Romania has one of the largest areas of undisturbed forest in Europe, covering almost 27% of the territory.[149] Some 3,700 plant species have been identified in the country, from which to date 23 have been declared natural monuments, 74 missing, 39 endangered, 171 vulnerable, and 1,253 rare.[150]

The fauna consists of 33,792 species of animals, 33,085 invertebrate and 707 vertebrate,[150] with almost 400 unique species of mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians,[151] including about 50% of Europe's (excluding Russia) brown bears[152] and 20% of its wolves.[153]

Climate
Owing to its distance from open sea and position on the southeastern portion of the European continent, Romania has a climate that is temperate and continental, with four distinct seasons. The average annual temperature is 11 °C (52 °F) in the south and 8 °C (46 °F) in the north.[154] In summer, average maximum temperatures in Bucharest rise to 28 °C (82 °F), and temperatures over 35 °C (95 °F) are fairly common in the lower-lying areas of the country.[155] In winter, the average maximum temperature is below 2 °C (36 °F).[155] Precipitation is average, with over 750 mm (30 in) per year only on the highest western mountains, while around Bucharest it drops to around 600 mm (24 in).[156] There are some regional differences: in the western parts, such as Banat, the climate is milder and has some Mediterranean influences; the eastern part of the country has a more pronounced continental climate. In Dobruja, the Black Sea also exerts an influence over the region's climate.[157]


Romania map of Köppen climate classification, according with Clima României from the Administra?ia Na?ionala de Meteorologie, Bucharest 2008
Average daily maximum and minimum temperatures for the eight largest cities in Romania[158]
Location	July (°C)	July (°F)	January (°C)	January (°F)
Bucharest	28.8/15.6	84/60	1.5/-5.5	35/22
Cluj-Napoca	24.5/12.7	76/55	0.3/-6.5	33/20
Timi?oara	27.8/14.6	82/58	2.3/-4.8	36/23
Ia?i	26.8/15	80/59	-0.1/-6.9	32/20
Constan?a	25.9/18	79/64	3.7/-2.3	39/28
Craiova	28.5/15.7	83/60	1.5/-5.6	35/22
Bra?ov	24.2/11.4	76/53	-0.1/-9.3	32/15
Gala?i	27.9/16.2	82/61	1.1/–5.3	34/22
Governance
Main articles: Politics of Romania and Government of Romania
Romania
Coat of arms of Romania
This article is part of a series on the
politics and government of
Romania
Constitution[show]
Government[show]
Parliament[show]
Judiciary[show]
Political parties[show]
Elections[show]
Administrative divisions[show]
Foreign relations[show]
Politicians[show]
Other countries Atlas
v t e
The Constitution of Romania is based on the Constitution of France's Fifth Republic and was approved in a national referendum on 8 December 1991, and amended in October 2003 to bring it into conformity with the EU legislation. The country is governed on the basis of a multi-party democratic system and the separation of powers between the legislative, executive and judicial branches. It is a semi-presidential republic where executive functions are held by both government and the president.[159] The latter is elected by popular vote for a maximum of two terms of five years and appoints the prime minister, who in turn appoints the Council of Ministers. The legislative branch of the government, collectively known as the Parliament (residing at the Palace of the Parliament), consists of two chambers (Senate and Chamber of Deputies) whose members are elected every four years by simple plurality.[160][161]

The justice system is independent of the other branches of government, and is made up of a hierarchical system of courts culminating in the High Court of Cassation and Justice, which is the supreme court of Romania.[162] There are also courts of appeal, county courts and local courts. The Romanian judicial system is strongly influenced by the French model, considering that it is based on civil law and is inquisitorial in nature. The Constitutional Court (Curtea Constitu?ionala) is responsible for judging the compliance of laws and other state regulations to the constitution, which is the fundamental law of the country and can only be amended through a public referendum.[160][163] The 2007 entry into the EU has been a significant influence on its domestic policy, and including judicial reforms, increased judicial cooperation with other member states, and measures to combat corruption.

Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of Romania

Klaus Iohannis, the current President of Romania since December 2014.
Since December 1989, Romania has pursued a policy of strengthening relations with the West in general, more specifically with the United States and the European Union albeit with its limited relations with Russia. It joined the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on 29 March 2004, the European Union (EU) on 1 January 2007, while it had joined the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank in 1972, and is a founding member of the World Trade Organization.[164]

The current government has stated its goal of strengthening ties with and helping other countries (in particular Moldova, Ukraine and Georgia) with the process of integration with the rest of the West.[165] Romania has also made clear since the late 1990s that it supports NATO and EU membership for the democratic former Soviet republics in Eastern Europe and the Caucasus.[165] Romania also declared its public support for Turkey, and Croatia joining the European Union.[165] Because it has a large Hungarian minority, Romania has also developed strong relations with Hungary. Romania opted on 1 January 2007, to adhere the Schengen Area, and its bid to join was approved by the European Parliament in June 2011, but was rejected by the EU Council in September 2011.

In December 2005, President Traian Basescu and United States Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice signed an agreement that would allow a U.S. military presence at several Romanian facilities primarily in the eastern part of the country.[166] In May 2009, Hillary Clinton, US Secretary of State, declared that "Romania is one of the most trustworthy and respectable partners of the USA."[167]

Relations with Moldova are a special case, considering that the two countries share the same language and a common history.[165] A movement for unification of Romania and Moldova appeared in the early 1990s after both countries achieved emancipation from communist rule,[168] but lost ground in the mid-1990s when a new Moldovan government pursued an agenda towards preserving a Moldovan republic independent of Romania.[169] After the 2009 protests in Moldova and subsequent removal of Communists from power, relations between the two countries have improved considerably.[170]

Military
Main articles: Romanian Armed Forces and Military history of Romania
The Romanian Armed Forces consist of Land, Air, and Naval Forces, and are led by a Commander-in-chief under the supervision of the Ministry of Defense, and by the president as the Supreme Commander during wartime. The Armed Forces consist of approximately 15,000 civilians and 75,000 are military personnel—45,800 for land, 13,250 for air, 6,800 for naval forces, and 8,800 in other fields.[171] The total defence spending in 2007 accounted for 2.05% of total national GDP, or approximately US$2.9 billion, with a total of $11 billion spent between 2006 and 2011 for modernization and acquisition of new equipment.[172]


Romanian soldiers in Afghanistan during a joint operation in 2003.
The Air Force currently operates modernized Soviet MiG-21 Lancer fighters which are due to be replaced by twelve F-16s, recently purchased.[173] The Air Force purchased seven new C-27J Spartan tactical airlifters,[174] while the Naval Forces acquired two modernized Type 22 frigates from the British Royal Navy.[175]

Romania has contributed troops to the international coalition in Afghanistan since 2002,[176] with a peak deployment of 1,600 troops in 2010.[177] Its combat mission in the country concluded in 2014.[178] Romanian troops participated in the occupation of Iraq, reaching a peak of 730 soldiers before being slowly drawn down to 350 soldiers. Romania terminated its mission in Iraq and withdrew its last troops on 24 July 2009, among the last countries to do so. The Regele Ferdinand frigate participated in the 2011 military intervention in Libya.[179]

In December 2011, the Romanian Senate unanimously adopted the draft law ratifying the Romania-United States agreement signed in September of the same year that would allow the establishment and operation of a US land-based ballistic missile defence system in Romania as part of NATO's efforts to build a continental missile shield.[180]

Administrative divisions
Main article: Administrative divisions of Romania
Romania is divided into 41 counties (jude?e, pronounced judets) and the municipality of Bucharest. Each county is administered by a county council, responsible for local affairs, as well as a prefect responsible for the administration of national affairs at the county level. The prefect is appointed by the central government but cannot be a member of any political party.[181] Each county is further subdivided into cities and communes, which have their own mayor and local council. There are a total of 319 cities and 2,686 communes in Romania.[182] A total of 103 of the larger cities have municipality statuses, which gives them greater administrative power over local affairs. The municipality of Bucharest is a special case as it enjoys a status on par to that of a county. It is further divided into six sectors and has a prefect, a general mayor (primar), and a general city council.[182]

The NUTS-3 (Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics) level divisions of European Union reflect Romania's administrative-territorial structure, and correspond to the 41 counties plus Bucharest.[183] The cities and communes correspond to the NUTS-5 level divisions, but there are no current NUTS-4 level divisions. The NUTS-1 (four macroregions) and NUTS-2[184] (eight development regions) divisions exist but have no administrative capacity, and are instead used for coordinating regional development projects and statistical purposes.[183]

Romanian Counties ABARAGBCBHBNBTBVBRBZCSCLCJCTCVDBDJGLGRGJHRHDILISIFMMMHMSNTOTPHSMSJSBSVTRTMTLVSVLVNB
Development region	Area (km2)	Population (2011)[185]	Most populous urban center*[186]
Nord-Vest	34,159	2,600,132	Cluj-Napoca (411,379)
Centru	34,082	2,360,805	Bra?ov (369,896)
Nord-Est	36,850	3,302,217	Ia?i (382,484)
Sud-Est	35,762	2,545,923	Constan?a (425,916)
Sud – Muntenia	34,489	3,136,446	Ploie?ti (276,279)
Bucure?ti – Ilfov	1,811	2,272,163	Bucharest (2,272,163)
Sud-Vest Oltenia	29,212	2,075,642	Craiova (356,544)
Vest	32,028	1,828,313	Timi?oara (384,809)
Economy
Main article: Economy of Romania
Further information: Agriculture in Romania and Industry of Romania

Dacia Duster concept at the Geneva Motor Show (2009).
In 2016, Romania had a GDP (PPP) of around $441.601 billion and a GDP per capita (PPP) of $22,348.[187] According to the World Bank, Romania is an upper-middle income country economy.[188] According to Eurostat, Romania's GDP per capita (PPS) was at 59% of the EU average in 2016, an increase from 41% in 2007 (the year of Romania's accession to the EU), making Romania one of the fastest growing economies in the EU.[189]

After 1989 the country experienced a decade of economic instability and decline, led in part by an obsolete industrial base and a lack of structural reform. From 2000 onward, however, the Romanian economy was transformed into one of relative macroeconomic stability, characterized by high growth, low unemployment and declining inflation. In 2006, according to the Romanian Statistics Office, GDP growth in real terms was recorded at 7.7%, one of the highest rates in Europe.[190] However, a recession following the global financial crisis of 2008–2009 forced the government to borrow externally, including an IMF €20bn bailout program.[191] GDP has been growing by over 2% each year since.[192] According to The World Bank, the GDP per capita purchasing power parity grew from $13,442 in 2007 to an estimated $22,124 in 2015.[193] Romania still has one of the lowest net average monthly wage in the EU of €540 in 2016,[194] and an inflation of -1.1% in 2016.[195] Unemployment in Romania is at 5.4% in 2017, which is very low compared to other EU countries.[193]


Romania is part of the EU single market.
Industrial output growth reached 6.5% year-on-year in February 2013, the highest in the EU-27.[196] The largest local companies include car maker Automobile Dacia, Petrom, Rompetrol, Ford Romania, Electrica, Romgaz, RCS & RDS and Banca Transilvania.[197] Exports have increased substantially in the past few years, with a 13% annual rise in exports in 2010. Romania's main exports are cars, software, clothing and textiles, industrial machinery, electrical and electronic equipment, metallurgic products, raw materials, military equipment, pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals, and agricultural products (fruits, vegetables, and flowers). Trade is mostly centered on the member states of the European Union, with Germany and Italy being the country's single largest trading partners. The account balance in 2012 was estimated to be -4.52% of the GDP.[198]

After a series of privatizations and reforms in the late 1990s and 2000s, government intervention in the Romanian economy is somewhat lower than in other European economies.[199] In 2005, the government replaced Romania's progressive tax system with a flat tax of 16% for both personal income and corporate profit, among the lowest rates in the European Union.[200] The economy is predominantly based on services, which account for 51% of GDP, even though industry and agriculture also have significant contributions, making up 36% and 13% of GDP, respectively. Additionally, 30% of the Romanian population was employed in 2006 in agriculture and primary production, one of the highest rates in Europe.[201]

Since 2000, Romania has attracted increasing amounts of foreign investment, becoming the single largest investment destination in Southeastern and Central Europe. Foreign direct investment was valued at €8.3 billion in 2006.[202] According to a 2011 World Bank report, Romania currently ranks 72nd out of 175 economies in the ease of doing business, scoring lower than other countries in the region such as the Czech Republic.[203] Additionally, a study in 2006 judged it to be the world's second-fastest economic reformer (after Georgia).[204]

Since 1867 the official currency has been the Romanian leu ("lion") and following a denomination in 2005, it has been valued at €0.2–0.3. After joining the EU in 2007, Romania is expected to adopt the Euro sometime around 2020.[205]

At 1 July 2015, Romanian's external debt was €90.59 billion.[206]

Infrastructure
Main articles: Transport in Romania and Energy in Romania

Romania's road network.

Graph Romania electricity supply mix 2015
According to the INSSE, Romania's total road network was estimated in 2015 at 86,080 kilometres (53,488 mi).[207] The World Bank estimates the railway network at 22,298 kilometres (13,855 mi) of track, the fourth-largest railroad network in Europe.[208] Rail transport experienced a dramatic decline after 1989, and was estimated at 99 million passenger journeys in 2004; but has experienced a recent (2013) revival due to infrastructure improvements and partial privatization of lines,[160] accounting for 45% of all passenger and freight movements in the country.[160] Bucharest Metro, the only underground railway system, was opened in 1979 and measures 61.41 km (38.16 mi) with an average ridership in 2007 of 600,000 passengers during the workweek.[209] There are sixteen international commercial airports in service today, with five of them (Henri Coanda International Airport, Aurel Vlaicu International Airport, Timi?oara International Airport, Constanta International Airport and Sibiu International Airport) being capable of handling wide-body aircraft. Over 9.2 million passengers flew through Bucharest's Henri Coanda International Airport in 2015.[210]

Romania is a net exporter of electrical energy and is 48th worldwide in terms of consumption of electric energy.[211][better source needed] Around a third of the produced energy comes from renewable sources, mostly as hydroelectric power.[212] In 2015, the main sources were coal (28%), hydroelectric (30%), nuclear (18%), and hydrocarbons (14%) .[213] It has one of the largest refining capacities in Eastern Europe, even though oil and natural gas production has been decreasing for more than a decade.[211] With one of the largest reserves of crude oil and shale gas in Europe,[211] it is among the most energy-independent countries in the European Union,[214] and is looking to further expand its nuclear power plant at Cernavoda.[215]

There were almost 18,3 million connections to the Internet in June 2014.[216] According to Bloomberg, in 2013 Romania ranked 5th in the world, and according to The Independent, it ranks number one in Europe at internet speeds,[217][218] with Timi?oara ranked among the highest in the world.[219]

Tourism

Bran Castle near Bra?ov, sometimes advertised as "Dracula's Castle", is a popular attraction for tourists.
Main article: Tourism in Romania
Tourism is a significant contributor to the Romanian economy, generating around 5% of GDP.[220] According to the World Travel and Tourism Council, Romania was estimated to have the fourth-fastest-growing travel and tourism total demand in the world, with an estimated potential growth of 8% per year from 2007 to 2016.[221] The number of tourists has been steadily rising, reaching 9.33 million foreign tourists in 2016, according to the Worldbank.[222] Tourism in Romania attracted €400 million in investments in 2005.[223]

More than 60% of the foreign visitors in 2007 were from other EU countries.[224] The popular summer attractions of Mamaia and other Black Sea Resorts attracted 1.3 million tourists in 2009.[225][226] Most popular skiing resorts are along the Valea Prahovei and in Poiana Bra?ov. Castles in Transylvanian cities such as Sibiu, Bra?ov, and Sighi?oara also attract a large number of tourists. Bran Castle, near Bra?ov, is one of the most famous attractions in Romania, drawing hundreds of thousands of tourists every year as it is often advertised as being Dracula's Castle.[227]

Rural tourism, focusing on folklore and traditions, has become an important alternative,[228] and is targeted to promote such sites as Bran and its Dracula's Castle, the Painted churches of Northern Moldavia, and the Wooden churches of Maramure?.[229] Other attractions include the Danube Delta, and the Sculptural Ensemble of Constantin Brâncu?i at Târgu Jiu.[230][231]

In 2014, Romania had 32,500 companies which were active in the hotel and restaurant industry, with a total turnover of EUR 2.6 billion.[232] More than 1.9 million foreign tourists visited Romania in 2014, 12% more than in 2013.[233] According to the country's National Statistics Institute, some 77% came from Europe (particularly from Germany, Italy and France), 12% from Asia, and less than 7% from North America.[233]

Science and technology
Main articles: Science and technology in Romania and List of Romanian inventors and discoverers

Coanda-1910 was an early aircraft with ducted fan propulsion.
Historically, Romanian researchers and inventors have made notable contributions to several fields. In the history of flight, Traian Vuia made the first airplane to take off on its own power[234] and Aurel Vlaicu built and flew some of the earliest successful aircraft, while Henri Coanda discovered the Coanda effect of fluidics. Victor Babe? discovered more than 50 types of bacteria; biologist Nicolae Paulescu discovered insulin, while Emil Palade, received the Nobel Prize for his contributions to cell biology. Lazar Edeleanu was the first chemist to synthesize amphetamine and he also invented the procedure of separating valuable petroleum components with selective solvents, while Costin Neni?escu developed numerous new classes of compounds in organic chemistry. Notable mathematicians include Spiru Haret, Grigore Moisil, and ?tefan Odobleja; physicists and inventors: ?erban ?i?eica, Alexandru Proca, and ?tefan Procopiu.

During the 1990s and 2000s, the development of research was hampered by several factors, including corruption, low funding and a considerable brain drain.[235] However, since the country's accession to the European Union, this has begun to change.[236] After being slashed by 50% in 2009 because of the global recession, R&D spending was increased by 44% in 2010 and now stands at $0.5 billion (1.5 billion lei).[237] In January 2011, the Parliament also passed a law that enforces "strict quality control on universities and introduces tough rules for funding evaluation and peer review".[238] The country has joined several major international organizations such as CERN and the European Space Agency.[239][240] Overall, the situation has been characterized as "rapidly improving", albeit from a low base.[241]

The nuclear physics facility of the European Union's proposed Extreme Light Infrastructure (ELI) laser will be built in Romania.[242] In early 2012, Romania launched its first satellite from the Centre Spatial Guyanais in French Guyana.[243] Starting December 2014, Romania is a co-owner of the International Space Station.[244]

Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Romania
See also: Minorities of Romania and Romanian diaspora
Historical population
Year	Pop.	±%
1866	4,424,961	—    
1887	5,500,000	+24.3%
1899	5,956,690	+8.3%
1912	7,234,919	+21.5%
1930	18,057,028	+149.6%
1939	19,934,000	+10.4%
1941	13,535,757	-32.1%
1948	15,872,624	+17.3%
1956	17,489,450	+10.2%
1966	19,103,163	+9.2%
1977	21,559,910	+12.9%
1992	22,760,449	+5.6%
2002	21,680,974	-4.7%
2011	20,121,641	-7.2%
2016 (est.)	19,474,952	-3.2%
Figures prior to 1948 do not reflect current borders.

Ethnic map of Romania based on 2011 census data.
According to the 2011 census, Romania's population is 20,121,641.[3] Like other countries in the region, its population is expected to gradually decline in the coming years as a result of sub-replacement fertility rates and negative net migration rate. In October 2011, Romanians made up 88.9% of the population. The largest ethnic minorities are the Hungarians, 6.1% of the population, and the Roma, 3.0% of the population.[d][245] Hungarians constitute a majority in the counties of Harghita and Covasna. Other minorities include Ukrainians, Germans, Turks, Lipovans, Aromanians, Tatars, and Serbs.[246] In 1930, there were 745,421 Germans in Romania,[247] but only about 36,000 remain today.[246] As of 2009, there were also approximately 133,000 immigrants living in Romania, primarily from Moldova and China.[128]

The total fertility rate (TFR) in 2015 was estimated at 1.33 children born per woman, which is below the replacement rate of 2.1, and one of the lowest in the world.[248] In 2014, 31.2% of births were to unmarried women.[249] The birth rate (9.49‰, 2012) is much lower than the mortality rate (11.84‰, 2012), resulting in a shrinking (-0.26% per year, 2012) and aging population (median age: 39.1, 2012), with approximately 14.9% of total population aged 65 years and over.[250][251][252] The life expectancy in 2015 was estimated at 74.92 years (71.46 years male, 78.59 years female).[248]

The number of Romanians and individuals with ancestors born in Romania living abroad is estimated at around 12 million.[139] After the Romanian Revolution of 1989, a significant number of Romanians emigrated to other European countries, North America or Australia.[253] For example, in 1990, 96,919 Romanians permanently settled abroad.[254]

Languages
Main article: Romanian language
The official language is Romanian, an Eastern Romance language similar to Aromanian, Megleno-Romanian, and Istro-Romanian, but sharing many features with other Romance languages such as Italian, French, Spanish and Portuguese. (The Romanian alphabet contains the same 26 letters of the Latin, plus 5 others, totaling 31.) Romanian is spoken as a first language by 85% of the population, while Hungarian and Vlax Romani are spoken by 6.2% and 1.2% of the population, respectively. There are 25,000 native German speakers, and 32,000 Turkish speakers in Romania, as well as almost 50,000 speakers of Ukrainian,[255] concentrated in some compact regions, near the border, where they form a majority.[256] According to the Constitution, local councils ensure linguistic rights to all minorities, with localities with ethnic minorities of over 20%, that minority's language can be used in the public administration, justice system, and education. Foreign citizens and stateless persons that live in Romania have access to justice and education in their own language.[257] English and French are the main foreign languages taught in schools.[258] In 2010, the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie identifies 4,756,100 French speakers in the country.[259] According to the 2012 Eurobarometer, English is spoken by 31% of Romanians, French is spoken by 17%, and Italian by 7%.[260]

Religion

The Ia?i Metropolitan Cathedral, founded in 1833, is the largest Orthodox church in Romania.
Religion in Romania (2011 census)
Religion			Percentage	
Eastern Orthodox	
?
81.0%
Roman Catholic	
?
4.3%
Reformed	
?
3.0%
Pentecostal	
?
1.8%
Greek Catholic	
?
0.7%
Baptist	
?
0.6%
Seventh-day Adventist	
?
0.4%
Other	
?
1.8%
Non-Religious	
?
0.2%
No data	
?
6.2%
Main articles: Religion in Romania and Romanian Orthodox Church
Romania is a secular state and has no state religion. An overwhelming majority of the population identify themselves as Christians. At the country's 2011 census, 81.0% of respondents identified as Orthodox Christians belonging to the Romanian Orthodox Church. Other denominations include Protestantism (6.2%), Roman Catholicism (4.3%), and Greek Catholicism (0.8%). From the remaining population, 195,569 people belong to other Christian denominations or have another religion, which includes 64,337 Muslims (mostly of Turkish and Tatar ethnicity) and 3,519 Jewish. Moreover, 39,660 people have no religion or are atheist, whilst the religion of the rest is unknown.[261]

The Romanian Orthodox Church is an autocephalous Eastern Orthodox Church in full communion with other Orthodox churches, with a Patriarch as its leader. It is the second-largest Orthodox Church in the world[citation needed], and unlike other Orthodox churches, it functions within a Latin culture and utilizes a Romance liturgical language.[262] Its canonical jurisdiction covers the territories of Romania and Moldova,[263] with dioceses for Romanians living in nearby Serbia and Hungary, as well as diaspora communities in Central and Western Europe, North America and Oceania.

Urbanization
Main articles: List of cities and towns in Romania and Metropolitan Areas in Romania
Although 54.0% of the population lived in urban areas in 2011,[3] this percentage has been declining since 1996.[264] Counties with over ? urban population are Hunedoara, Bra?ov and Constan?a, while with less than a third are Dâmbovi?a (30.06%) and Giurgiu and Teleorman.[3] Bucharest is the capital and the largest city in Romania, with a population of over 1.8 million in 2011. Its larger urban zone has a population of almost 2.2 million,[265] which are planned to be included into a metropolitan area up to 20 times the area of the city proper.[266][267][268] Another 19 cities have a population of over 100,000, with Cluj-Napoca and Timi?oara of slightly more than 300,000 inhabitants, Ia?i, Constan?a, Craiova and Bra?ov with over 250,000 inhabitants, and Gala?i and Ploie?ti with over 200,000 inhabitants.[186] Metropolitan areas have been constituted for most of these cities.

  v t e
Largest cities in Romania
2011 Census[269]
Rank	Name	County	Pop.	Rank	Name	County	Pop.	
Bucharest
Bucharest
Cluj-Napoca
Cluj-Napoca	1	Bucharest	Bucharest	1,883,425	11	Braila	Braila	180,302	Timi?oara
Timi?oara
Ia?i
Ia?i
2	Cluj-Napoca	Cluj	324,576	12	Arad	Arad	159,704
3	Timi?oara	Timi?	319,279	13	Pite?ti	Arge?	155,383
4	Ia?i	Ia?i	290,422	14	Sibiu	Sibiu	147,245
5	Constan?a	Constan?a	283,872	15	Bacau	Bacau	144,307
6	Craiova	Dolj	269,506	16	Târgu Mure?	Mure?	134,290
7	Bra?ov	Bra?ov	253,200	17	Baia Mare	Maramure?	123,738
8	Gala?i	Gala?i	249,342	18	Buzau	Buzau	115,494
9	Ploie?ti	Prahova	209,945	19	Boto?ani	Boto?ani	106,847
10	Oradea	Bihor	196,367	20	Satu Mare	Satu Mare	102,441
Education
Main article: Romanian educational system

University of Bucharest was opened in 1864.

Illiteracy rate by county (2011). Cooler colors indicate a lower rate of illiteracy, and warmer colors indicate a higher rate of illiteracy. The national average is 1.22%.
Since the Romanian Revolution of 1989, the Romanian educational system has been in a continuous process of reform that has received mixed criticism.[270] In 2004, some 4.4 million of the population were enrolled in school. Out of these, 650,000 in kindergarten (3–6 years), 3.11 million in primary and secondary level, and 650,000 in tertiary level (universities).[271] In the same year, the adult literacy rate was 97.3% (45th worldwide), while the combined gross enrollment ratio for primary, secondary and tertiary schools was 75% (52nd worldwide).[272] Kindergarten is optional between 3 and 6 years. Since 2012, compulsory schooling starts at age 6 with the "preparatory school year" (clasa pregatitoare)[273] and is compulsory until tenth grade.[274] Primary and secondary education is divided into 12 or 13 grades. There also exists a semi-legal, informal private tutoring system used mostly during secondary school, which has prospered during the Communist regime.[275]

Higher education is aligned with the European higher education area. The results of the PISA assessment study in schools for the year 2012 placed Romania on the 45th rank out of 65 participant countries[276] and in 2016 the Romanian government released statistics showing 42% of 15-year-olds are functionally illiterate in reading.[277] though Romania often wins medals in the mathematical olympiads[278][279][280] and not only. Alexandru Ioan Cuza University of Ia?i, Babe?-Bolyai University of Cluj-Napoca, University of Bucharest, and West University of Timi?oara have been included in the QS World University Rankings' top 800.[281]

Healthcare
Main article: Healthcare in Romania
Romania has a universal health care system, and total health expenditures by the government are roughly 5% of the GDP.[282] It covers medical examinations, any surgical interventions, and any post-operator medical care, and provides free or subsidized medicine for a range of diseases. The state is obliged to fund public hospitals and clinics. The most common causes of death are cardiovascular diseases and cancer. Transmissible diseases, such as tuberculosis, syphilis or viral hepatitis, are quite common by European standards.[283] In 2010, Romania had 428 state and 25 private hospitals,[284] with 6.2 hospital beds per 1,000 people,[285] and over 200,000 medical staff, including over 52,000 doctors.[286] As of 2013, the emigration rate of doctors was 9%, higher than the European average of 2.5%.[287]

Culture

Sibiu was the European Capital of Culture in 2007.

Mihai Eminescu is the national poet of Romania and Moldova.

George Enescu was an influential Romanian composer, violinist, pianist, conductor, and teacher

Angela Gheorghiu, one of the world's foremost sopranos.
Main articles: Culture of Romania and National symbols of Romania
Arts and monuments
Main articles: Romanian literature, Cinema of Romania, Music of Romania, and List of World Heritage Sites in Romania
See also: List of films shot in Romania
The topic of the origin of the Romanians began to be discussed by the end of the 18th century among the Transylvanian School scholars.[288] Several writers rose to prominence in the 19th century, including George Co?buc, Ioan Slavici, Mihail Kogalniceanu, Vasile Alecsandri, Nicolae Balcescu, Ion Luca Caragiale, Ion Creanga, and Mihai Eminescu, the later being considered the greatest and most influential Romanian poet, particularly for the poem Luceafarul.[289] In the 20th century, Romanian artists reached international acclaim, including Tristan Tzara, Marcel Janco,[290] Mircea Eliade, Nicolae Grigorescu, Marin Preda, Liviu Rebreanu,[291] Eugène Ionesco, Emil Cioran, and Constantin Brâncu?i. The latter has a sculptural ensemble in Târgu Jiu, while his sculpture Bird in Space, was auctioned in 2005 for $27.5 million.[292][293] Romanian-born Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1986, while writer Herta Müller received the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2009.

Prominent Romanian painters include Nicolae Grigorescu, ?tefan Luchian, Ion Andreescu Nicolae Tonitza and Theodor Aman. Notable Romanian classical composers of the 19th and 20th centuries include Ciprian Porumbescu, Anton Pann, Eduard Caudella, Mihail Jora, Dinu Lipatti and especially George Enescu. The annual George Enescu Festival is held in Bucharest in honor of the 20th century emponymous composer.[294] Contemporary musicians like Angela Gheorghiu, Gheorghe Zamfir,[295][296] Inna,[297] Alexandra Stan[298] and many others have achieved various levels of international acclaim. At the Eurovision Song Contest Romanian singers have achieved third place in 2005 and 2010.[299]

In cinema, several movies of the Romanian New Wave have achieved international acclaim. At the Cannes Film Festival, 4 Months, 3 Weeks and 2 Days by Cristian Mungiu won Palme d'Or in 2007.[300] At the Berlin International Film Festival, Child's Pose by Calin Peter Netzer won the Golden Bear in 2013.[301]

The list of World Heritage Sites includes six cultural sites located within Romania, including eight Painted churches of northern Moldavia, eight Wooden Churches of Maramure?, seven Villages with fortified churches in Transylvania, the Horezu Monastery, and the Historic Centre of Sighi?oara. [302] The city of Sibiu, with its Brukenthal National Museum, was selected as the 2007 European Capital of Culture.[303] Multiple castles exist in Romania, including popular tourist attractions of Pele? Castle,[304] Corvin Castle, and "Dracula's Castle".[305]

Holidays, traditions and cuisine
See also: Romanian dress, Romanian folklore, and Romanian cuisine
There are 12 non-working public holidays, including the Great Union Day, celebrated on 1 December in commemoration of the 1918 union of Transylvania with Romania.[306] Winter holidays include the Christmas festivities and the New Year during which, various unique folklore dances and games are common: plugu?orul, sorcova, ursul, and capra.[307][308] The traditional Romanian dress that otherwise has largely fallen out of use during the 20th century, is a popular ceremonial vestment worn on these festivities, especially in the rural areas.[309] Sacrifices of live pigs during Christmas and lambs during Easter has required a special derogation from EU law after 2007.[310] During Easter, painted eggs are very common, while on 1 March features mar?i?or gifting, a tradition likely of Thracian origin.[311]

Romanian cuisine shares some similarities with other Balkan cuisines such as Greek, Bulgarian and Turkish cuisine.[312] Ciorba includes a wide range of sour soups, while mititei, mamaliga (similar to polenta), and sarmale are featured commonly in main courses.[313] Pork, chicken and beef are the preferred meats, but lamb and fish are also popular.[314] [315] Certain traditional recipes are made in direct connection with the holidays: chiftele, toba and tochitura at Christmas; drob, pasca and cozonac at Easter and other Romanian holidays.[316] ?uica is a strong plum brandy reaching a 70% alcohol content which is the country's traditional alcoholic beverage, taking as much as 75% of the national crop (Romania is one of the largest plum producers in the world).[317][318] Traditional alcoholic beverages also include wine, rachiu, palinca and vi?inata, but beer consumption has increased dramatically over the recent years.[319]

Sports
Main article: Sports in Romania

Simona Halep is currently ranked world No. 1 in singles by the Women's Tennis Association (WTA).
Association football (soccer) is the most popular sport in Romania with over 234,000 registered players as of 2010.[320] The governing body is the Romanian Football Federation, which belongs to UEFA. The Romania national football team has taken part seven times in the FIFA World Cup games and had its most successful period during the 1990s, when they reached the quarterfinals of the 1994 FIFA World Cup and was ranked third by FIFA in 1997.[321] The core player of this "Golden Generation" was Gheorghe Hagi, who was nicknamed "the Maradona of the Carpathians."[322][323] Other successful players include Nicolae Dobrin, Dudu Georgescu, Florea Dumitrache, Li?a Dumitru, Ilie Balaci, Lo?i Bölöni, Costica ?tefanescu, Cornel Dinu or Gheorghe Popescu, and most recently Adrian Mutu, Cristian Chivu, Dan Petrescu or Cosmin Contra.

The most successful club is Steaua Bucure?ti, who were the first Eastern European team to win the European Champions Cup in 1986, and were runners-up in 1989. Dinamo Bucure?ti reached the European Champions' Cup semifinal in 1984 and the Cup Winners' Cup semifinal in 1990. Other important Romanian football clubs are Rapid Bucure?ti, UTA Arad, Universitatea Craiova, CFR Cluj and Petrolul Ploie?ti.


Cristina Neagu is the only female handball player in history to win three IHF World Player of the Year awards.
Tennis is the second-most-popular sport, with over 15,000 registered players.[324] Romania reached the Davis Cup finals three times (1969, 1971, 1972). The tennis player Ilie Nastase won several Grand Slam titles, and was the first player to be ranked as number 1 by ATP between 1973 and 1974. Virginia Ruzici won the French Open in 1978, and was runner-up in 1980, Simona Halep played the final in 2014 and 2017 and is currently ranked 1st by the WTA.[325] The Romanian duo Horia Tecau and Florin Mergea won the doubles silver medal at the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.[326]

Other popular team sports are team handball,[324] basketball[327] and rugby union. Both the men's and women's handball national teams are multiple world champions. On 13 January 2010, Cristina Neagu became the first Romanian in handball to win the IHF World Player of the Year award.[328] Basketball is widely enjoyed, especially by the youth.[327] Gheorghe Mure?an was one of the two tallest players to ever play in the NBA. In 2016, Romania was chosen as a host for the 2017 EuroBasket. The rugby national team has competed in every Rugby World Cup. Popular individual sports include athletics, chess, judo, dancesport, table tennis and combat sports (Lucian Bute, Leonard Dorin Doroftei, Mihai Leu aka Michael Loewe, Daniel Ghi?a, Benjamin Adegbuyi, Andrei Stoica, etc.).[324] While it has a limited popularity nowadays, oina is a traditional Romanian sporting game similar to baseball that has been continuously practiced since at least the 14th century.[329]

Romania participated in the Olympic Games for the first time in 1900 and has taken part in 21 of the 28 summer games. It has been one of the more successful countries at the Summer Olympic Games, with a total of 307 medals won throughout the years, of which 89 gold ones, ranking 15th overall, and second (behind neighbour Hungary) of the nations that have never hosted the game. It participated at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles in defiance of a Warsaw Pact boycott and finished second in gold medals (20) and third in total medal count (53).[330] Almost a quarter of all the medals and 25 of the gold ones were won in gymnastics, with Nadia Comaneci becoming the first gymnast ever to score a perfect ten in an Olympic event at the 1976 Summer Olympics.[331] Romanian competitors have won gold medals in other Olympic sports: rowing, athletics, canoeing, wrestling, shooting, fencing, swimming, weightlifting, boxing, and judo. At the Winter Olympic Games, Romania has won only a bronze medal in bobsleigh at the 1968 Winter Olympics.

See also
Index of Romania-related articles
Outline of Romania
 Romania – Wikipedia book
Notes
Jump up ^ "am scris aceste sfente car?i de înva?aturi, sa fie popilor rumânesti ... sa în?eleaga to?i oamenii cine-s rumâni cre?tini" "Întrebare cre?tineasca" (1559), Bibliografia româneasca veche, IV, 1944, p. 6.
"... ca vazum cum toate limbile au ?i înfluresc întru cuvintele slavite a lui Dumnezeu numai noi românii pre limba nu avem. Pentru aceia cu mare munca scoasem de limba jidoveasca si greceasca si srâbeasca pre limba româneasca 5 car?i ale lui Moisi prorocul si patru car?i ?i le daruim voo fra?i rumâni ?i le-au scris în cheltuiala multa ... ?i le-au daruit voo fra?ilor români, ... ?i le-au scris voo fra?ilor români" Palia de la Ora?tie (1581–1582), Bucure?ti, 1968.
În ?ara Ardealului nu lacuiesc numai unguri, ce ?i sa?i peste seama de mul?i ?i români peste tot locul ..., Grigore Ureche, Letopise?ul ?arii Moldovei, p. 133–134.
Jump up ^ In his literary testament Ienachi?a Vacarescu writes: "Urma?ilor mei Vacare?ti!/Las voua mo?tenire:/Cre?terea limbei române?ti/?-a patriei cinstire."
In the "Istoria faptelor lui Mavroghene-Voda ?i a razmeri?ei din timpul lui pe la 1790" a Pitar Hristache writes: "Încep dupa-a mea ideie/Cu vreo câteva condeie/Povestea mavrogheneasca/Dela ?ara Româneasca.
Jump up ^ In 1816, the Greek scholar Dimitrie Daniel Philippide published in Leipzig his work The History of Romania, followed by The Geography of Romania.
On the tombstone of Gheorghe Lazar in Avrig (built in 1823) there is the inscription: "Precum Hristos pe Lazar din mor?i a înviat/A?a tu România din somn ai de?teptat."
Jump up ^ 2002 census data, based on population by ethnicity Archived 24 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine., gave a total of 535,250 Roma in Romania. Many ethnicities are not recorded, as they do not have ID cards Archived 15 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine.. International sources give higher figures than the official census (e.g., UNDP's Regional Bureau for Europe, World Bank, "International Association for Official Statistics" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 February 2008.
References
Jump up ^ "Constitution of Romania". Cdep.ro. Archived from the original on 7 September 2017. Retrieved 2 October 2013.
Jump up ^ "Reservations and Declarations for Treaty No.148 – European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages". Council of Europe. Council of Europe. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 3 December 2015.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e "Romanian 2011 census (final results)" (PDF) (in Romanian). INSSE. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 July 2013. Retrieved 28 August 2012.
Jump up ^ "Annual official estimate" Archived 30 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine..(PDF) 2017 Revision
^ Jump up to: a b "Romania". International Monetary Fund. Archived from the original on 3 January 2018. Retrieved 8 December 2017.
Jump up ^ "Gini coefficient of equivalised disposable income (source: SILC)". Eurostat Data Explorer. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 8 February 2015.
Jump up ^ "2016 Human Development Report Romania" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2016. pp. 2–3. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 March 2017. Retrieved 22 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 November 2014. Retrieved 28 September 2014.
Jump up ^ "Romania Geography". aboutromania.com. Archived from the original on 28 March 2015. Retrieved 4 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 25 April 2017. Retrieved 24 April 2017.
Jump up ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 24 September 2017.
Jump up ^ ""Country Comparison : GDP - Real Growth Rate", CIA World Factbook, accessed 26 July 2017". Cia.gov. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017. Retrieved 26 July 2017.
Jump up ^ "Explanatory Dictionary of the Romanian Language, 1998; New Explanatory Dictionary of the Romanian Language, 2002" (in Romanian). Dexonline.ro. Archived from the original on 12 March 2008. Retrieved 25 September 2010.
Jump up ^ Verres, Andréas. Acta et Epistolae. I. p. 243. nunc se Romanos vocant
Jump up ^ Cl. Isopescu (1929). "Notizie intorno ai romeni nella letteratura geografica italiana del Cinquecento". Bulletin de la Section Historique. XVI: 1–90. ... si dimandano in lingua loro Romei ... se alcuno dimanda se sano parlare in la lingua valacca, dicono a questo in questo modo: Sti Rominest ? Che vol dire: Sai tu Romano, ...
Jump up ^ Holban, Maria (1983). Calatori straini despre ?arile Române (in Romanian). II. Ed. ?tiin?ifica ?i Enciclopedica. pp. 158–161. Anzi essi si chiamano romanesci, e vogliono molti che erano mandati quì quei che erano dannati a cavar metalli ...
Jump up ^ Cernovodeanu, Paul (1960). Voyage fait par moy, Pierre Lescalopier l'an 1574 de Venise a Constantinople, fol 48. Studii ?i materiale de istorie medievala (in Romanian). IV. p. 444. Tout ce pays la Wallachie et Moldavie et la plus part de la Transilvanie a eté peuplé des colonies romaines du temps de Traian l'empereur ... Ceux du pays se disent vrais successeurs des Romains et nomment leur parler romanechte, c'est-à-dire romain ...
Jump up ^ Ion Rotaru, Literatura româna veche, "The Letter of Neac?u from Câmpulung" Archived 9 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine., Bucure?ti, 1981, pp. 62–65
Jump up ^ Brezeanu, Stelian (1999). Romanitatea Orientala în Evul Mediu. Bucharest: Editura All Educational. pp. 229–246.
Jump up ^ Goina, Calin. How the State Shaped the Nation: an Essay on the Making of the Romanian Nation Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine. in Regio – Minorities, Politics, Society.
Jump up ^ "Wallachia and Moldavia, 1859–61". Archived from the original on 9 June 2007. Retrieved 5 January 2008.
Jump up ^ See, for example, "Rumania: Remarkable Common Ground" Archived 31 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine., The New York Times (December 21, 1989).
Jump up ^ See the Google Ngrams for Romania, Rumania, and Roumania.
Jump up ^ "General principles" (in Romanian). cdep.ro. Archived from the original on 7 September 2017. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
Jump up ^ Europe Before Rome: A Site-by-Site Tour of the Stone, Bronze, and Iron Ages (T. Douglas Price) [1] Archived 6 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Zilhão, João (2006). "Neanderthals and Moderns Mixed and It Matters". Evolutionary Anthropology. 15 (5): 183–195. doi:10.1002/evan.20110.
Jump up ^ John Noble Wilford (1 December 2009). "A Lost European Culture, Pulled From Obscurity". The New York Times (30 November 2009). Archived from the original on 31 December 2016.
Jump up ^ Gibbs, Patrick. "Antiquity Vol 79 No 306 December 2005 The earliest salt production in the world: an early Neolithic exploitation in Poiana Slatinei-Lunca, Romania Olivier Weller & Gheorghe Dumitroaia". Antiquity.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 12 October 2012.
^ Jump up to: a b c Hitchins 2014, p. 7.
Jump up ^ Herodotus. Histories, 4.93–4.97.
Jump up ^ The Cambridge Ancient History (Volume 10) (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. 1996. J. J. Wilkes mentions "the Getae of the Dobrudja, who were akin to the Dacians" (p. 562)
Jump up ^ Mócsy, András (1974). Pannonia and Upper Moesia. Routledge and Kegan Paul. ISBN 0-7100-7714-9. See p. 364, n. 41: "If there is any justification for dividing the Thracian ethnic group, then, unlike V. Georgiev who suggests splitting it into the Thraco-Getae and the Daco-Mysi, I consider a division into the Thraco-Mysi and the Daco-Getae the more likely."
Jump up ^ Hitchins 2014, pp. 13–14.
Jump up ^ Matley, Ian (1970). Romania; a Profile. Praeger. p. 85.
Jump up ^ Giurescu, Constantin C. (1972). The Making of the Romanian People and Language. Bucharest: Meridiane Publishing House. pp. 43, 98–101, 141.
Jump up ^ Eutropius, Abridgment of Roman History BOOK IX.
Jump up ^ Watkins, Thayer. "The Economic History of the Western Roman Empire". Archived from the original on 17 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008. The Emperor Aurelian recognized the realities of the military situation in Dacia and, around 271 AD., withdrew Roman troops from Dacia, leaving it to the Goths. The Lower Danube once again became the northern frontier of the Roman Empire in Eastern Europe
Jump up ^ Jordanes (551). Getica, sive, De Origine Actibusque Gothorum. Constantinople. Archived from the original on 7 October 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Iliescu, Vl.; Paschale, Chronicon (1970). Fontes Historiae Daco-Romanae. II. Bucure?ti. pp. 363, 587.
Jump up ^ Teodor, Dan Gh. (1995). Istoria României de la începuturi pâna în secolul al VIII-lea. 2. Bucure?ti. pp. 294–325.
Jump up ^ Constantine VII, Porphyrogenitus (950). Constantine Porphyrogenitus De Administrando Imperio. Constantinople. Archived from the original on 23 October 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Lup?a, Cristian (1 March 2008). "Regele Decebal" (in Romanian). Lumea-Copiilor. Archived from the original on 19 April 2015. Retrieved 13 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Împaratul Traian, stramo?ul uitat" (in Romanian). Adevarul. 4 July 2013. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 13 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Mitul stramo?ilor în "epopeea na?ionala": Dacii, Columna ?i Burebista" (in Romanian). Realitatea TV. 13 April 2015. Archived from the original on 21 July 2015. Retrieved 13 April 2015.
Jump up ^ Pop, Ioan-Aurel (Winter 2001). "The Romanians' Identity in the 16th Century According to Italian Authors" (PDF). Transylvanian Review. Romanian Cultural Foundation. 10 (4): 3. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 October 2014.
Jump up ^ "Gesta Hungarorum, the chronicle of Bele Regis Notarius". Scribd.com. Archived from the original on 16 September 2010. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ Makkai, László (2001). Köpeczi, Béla, ed. "History of Transylvania: III. Transylvania in the Medieval Hungarian Kingdom (896–1526)". New York: Institute of History of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Columbia University Press. Archived from the original on 10 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ ?tefanescu, ?tefan (1991). Istoria medie a României. I. Bucharest. p. 114.
Jump up ^ Predescu, Lucian (1940). Enciclopedia Cugetarea.
Jump up ^ Várkonyi, Ágnes R. (2001). "Columbia University Press". In Köpeczi, Béla. History of Transylvania: VI. The Last Decades of the Independent Principality (1660–1711). 2. New York: Institute of History of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. Archived from the original on 30 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ István, Vásáry. "Cumans and Tatars". cambridge.org. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
Jump up ^ Copy of Domnitori Romani. Archived from the original on 10 April 2015. Retrieved 5 April 2015.
Jump up ^ Giurescu, p. 211–13. Giurescu, Constantin C. (2007) [1935]. Istoria Românilor (in Romanian). Bucharest: Editura All.
Jump up ^ David Prodan, Supplex Libellus Valachorum, Bucharest, 1948.
Jump up ^ Kocsis, Karoly; Kocsis-Hodosi, Eszter (1999). Ethnic structure of the population on the present territory of Transylvania (1880–1992). Archived from the original on 22 February 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Kocsis, Karoly; Kocsis-Hodosi, Eszter (2001). Ethnic Geography of the Hungarian Minorities in the Carpathian Basin. Simon Publications. p. 102. ISBN 1-931313-75-X.
Jump up ^ Gazeta de Transilvania, year XI, no. 34 of 26 April 1848, p. 140.
Jump up ^ Dogaru (1978), p. 862.
Jump up ^ Cazani?teanu (1967), p. 36.
Jump up ^ Nasturel (1900/1901), p. 257. Nasturel, Petre Vasiliu, Steagul, stema româna, însemnele domne?ti, trofee (The Romanian flag [and] coat of arms; the princely insignias [and] trophies), Bucharest, 1903.
Jump up ^ The establishment of the Balkan national states, 1804–1920. Books.google.com. Archived from the original on 26 June 2014. Retrieved 28 March 2012.
Jump up ^ Bobango, Gerald J (1979). The emergence of the Romanian national State. New York: Boulder. ISBN 978-0-914710-51-6.
Jump up ^ "San Stefano Preliminary Treaty" (in Russian). 1878. Archived from the original on 21 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ The Treaty of Berlin, 1878 – Excerpts on the Balkans. Internet Modern History Sourcebook. Berlin: Fordham University. 13 July 1878. Archived from the original on 8 June 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Patterson, Michelle (August 1996). "The Road to Romanian Independence". Canadian Journal of History. Archived from the original (– Scholar search) on 24 March 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Anderson, Frank Maloy; Hershey, Amos Shartle (1918). Handbook for the Diplomatic History of Europe, Asia, and Africa 1870–1914. Washington D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Jump up ^ Horne, Charles F. "Romania's Declaration of War with Austria-Hungary". Source Records of the Great War. Archived from the original on 7 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Erlikman, Vadim (2004). Poteri narodonaseleniia v XX veke : spravochnik. Moscow. ISBN 5-93165-107-1.
Jump up ^ Bernard Anthony Cook (2001). Europe Since 1945: An Encyclopedia. Taylor&Francis. p. 162. ISBN 0-8153-4057-5.
Jump up ^ "Text of the Treaty of Trianon". World War I Document Archive. Archived from the original on 4 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Malbone W. Graham (October 1944). "The Legal Status of the Bukovina and Bessarabia". The American Journal of International Law. American Society of International Law. 38 (4): 667–673. doi:10.2307/2192802. JSTOR 2192802.
Jump up ^ "World War I: The Players". www.mtholyoke.edu. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Statul National Unitar (România Mare 1919–1940)" (in Romanian). ici.ro. Archived from the original on 12 June 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "his1". Aneir-cpce.ro. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "VIDEO Înregistrare senza?ionala cu Hitler: "Fara petrolul din România nu a? fi atacat niciodata URSS-ul"". adevarul.ro. Archived from the original on 11 November 2012. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Business in Romania: a country that's fast off the Bloc – Two years of EU membership have transformed the business face of Romania and savvy UK firms are reaping the rewards. Paul Bray reports". The Daily Telegraph. London. 24 February 2010. Archived from the original on 29 May 2010. Retrieved 1 May 2010.
Jump up ^ "Post-War Romania". www.shsu.edu. Archived from the original on 9 March 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ Ioan Scurtu; Theodora Stanescu-Stanciu; Georgiana Margareta Scurtu (2002). Istoria Românilor între anii 1918–1940 (in Romanian). University of Bucharest. Archived from the original on 13 November 2007.
Jump up ^ Nagy-Talavera, Nicolas M. (1970). Green Shirts and Others: a History of Fascism in Hungary and Romania. Hoover Institution Press. p. 305. ISBN 973-9432-11-5.
Jump up ^ Ioan Scurtu; Theodora Stanescu-Stanciu; Georgiana Margareta Scurtu. "Decret regal privind investirea generalului Ion Antonescu cu depline puteri". Istoria românilor între anii 1918–1940 (in Romanian). Archived from the original on 2 October 2011. Retrieved 19 September 2011.
Jump up ^ M. Broszat (1968). "Deutschland – Ungarn – Rumänien. Entwicklung und Grundfaktoren nationalsozialistischer Hegemonial- und Bündnispolitik 1938–1941". Historische Zeitschrift (in German) (206): 552–553.
Jump up ^ Note: follow the World War II link: Ronald D. Bachman, ed. (9 November 2005). Romania:World War II (Report) (2 ed.). Washington D.C.: Library of Congress.Federal Research Division. Archived from the original on 14 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Ilie Fugaru, Romania clears doubts about Holocaust past, UPI, 11 November 2004
Jump up ^ International Commission on the Holocaust in Romania (28 January 2012). "Executive Summary: Historical Findings and Recommendations" (PDF). Final Report of the International Commission on the Holocaust in Romania. Yad Vashem (The Holocaust Martyrs' and Heroes' Remembrance Authority). Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 January 2012. Retrieved 28 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Associated, The (17 April 2012). "Study: More than 280,000 Jews killed in Romania in WWII – Haaretz Daily Newspaper | Israel News". Haaretz.com. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013. Retrieved 24 April 2012.
Jump up ^ "Ion Antonescu | ruler of Romania". Archived from the original on 20 May 2016. Retrieved 28 June 2016.
Jump up ^ "Holocaust Education, Remembrance, and Research in Romania". holocaustremembrance.com. Archived from the original on 17 April 2015. Retrieved 4 April 2015.
Jump up ^ Axworthy, Mark; Scafes, Cornel; Craciunoiu, Cristian (editors) (1995). Third axis, Fourth Ally: Romanian Armed Forces In the European War 1941–1945. London: Arms & Armour Press. pp. 1–368. ISBN 963-389-606-1.
Jump up ^ "The Biggest Mistakes in World War 2:Ploesti – the most important target". Archived from the original on 18 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Constantiniu, Florin, O istorie sincera a poporului român ("An Honest History of the Romanian People"), Ed. Univers Enciclopedic, Bucure?ti, 1997, ISBN 973-9243-07-X
Jump up ^ Clodfelter, Michael (2002). Warfare and Armed Conflicts- A Statistical Reference to Casualty and Other Figures, 1500–2000 (2 ed.). Jefferson, NC: McFarland. p. 582. ISBN 0-7864-1204-6.
Jump up ^ Tomiuc, Eugen (6 May 2005). "World War II – 60 Years After: Former Romanian Monarch Remembers Decision To Switch Sides". Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Giurescu, "«Alegeri" dupa model sovietic", p.17 (citing Berry), 18 (citing Berry and note); Macuc, p.40; Tismaneanu, p.113
Jump up ^ "Romania: Country studies – Chapter 1.7.1 "Petru Groza's Premiership"". Federal research Division, Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 14 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romania". CIA – The World Factbook. Archived from the original on 10 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romania – Country Background and Profile". ed-u.com. Archived from the original on 10 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Rîjnoveanu, Carmen (2003). "Romania's Policy of Autonomy in the Context of the Sino-Soviet Conflict" (PDF). Czech Republic Military History Institute, Militärgeschichtliches Forscheungamt. p. 1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 June 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Roper, Stephen D. (2000). Romania: The Unfinished Revolution. London: Routledge. p. 18. ISBN 90-5823-027-9.
Jump up ^ Cioroianu, Adrian (2005). On the Shoulders of Marx. An Incursion into the History of Romanian Communism (in Romanian). Bucharest: Editura Curtea Veche. pp. 68–73. ISBN 973-669-175-6.
Jump up ^ Stoica, Stan (2007). Dic?ionar de Istorie a României (in Romanian). Bucharest: Editura Merona. pp. 77–78; 233–34. ISBN 973-7839-21-8.
Jump up ^ Ioni?oiu, Cicerone (2000). Victimele terorii comuniste. Aresta?i, tortura?i, întemni?a?i, uci?i. Dic?ionar (in Romanian). Bucharest: Editura Ma?ina de scris. ISBN 973-99994-2-5.[page needed]
Jump up ^ Consiliul National pentru Studierea Ahivelor Securita?ii, Bande, bandi?i si eroi; Grupurile de rezisten?a ?i Securitatea (1948–1968), Editura Enciclopedica, Bucure?ti, 2003
Jump up ^ Raportul Comisiei Preziden?iale pentru Analiza Dictaturii Comuniste din România (Report). Comisia Preziden?iala pentru Analiza Dictaturii Comuniste din România. 15 December 2006. pp. 215–217.
Jump up ^ Political Tension 1968 (in Romanian). Bucharest: British Pathé. 21 August 1968. Archived from the original on 21 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Romania: Soviet Union and Eastern Europe". Country Studies.us. Archived from the original on 5 July 2009. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Middle East policies in Communist Romania". Country Studies.us. Archived from the original on 5 July 2009. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Deletant, Dennis. "New Evidence on Romania and the Warsaw Pact, 1955–1989" (PDF). Cold War International History Project e-Dossier Series. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 January 2012.
Jump up ^ Carothers, Thomas. "Romania: The Political Background" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 August 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008. This seven-year period can be characterized as a gradualistic, often ambiguous transition away from communist rule towards democracy.
Jump up ^ Hellman, Joel (January 1998). "Winners Take All: The Politics of Partial Reform in Postcommunist". Transitions World Politics. 50 (2): 203–234.
Jump up ^ "Institutul de Investigare a Crimelor Comunismului si Memoria Exilului Romanesc". mineriade.iiccr.ro. Archived from the original on 22 August 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Institutul de Investigare a Crimelor Comunismului si Memoria Exilului Romanesc". mineriade.iiccr.ro. Archived from the original on 22 August 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ Bohlen, Celestine (15 June 1990). "Evolution in Europe; Romanian miners invade Bucharest". The New York Times. Retrieved 31 August 2008. Responding to an emergency appeal by President Ion Iliescu, thousands of miners from northern Romania descended on the capital city today
Jump up ^ "Institutul de Investigare a Crimelor Comunismului si Memoria Exilului Romanesc". mineriade.iiccr.ro. Archived from the original on 22 August 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ Presa internationala despre alegerile din Romania: Traian Basescu a castigat la limita; Romanii au mici sperante sa se dezghete ajutorul de la FMI – International Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine.. HotNews.ro. Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "Romania profile – Leaders – BBC News-GB". Archived from the original on 17 July 2016. Retrieved 28 June 2016.
Jump up ^ "Biroul Electoral Central, rezultate". Biroul Electoral Central. 2012. Archived from the original on 15 March 2016. Retrieved 7 October 2016.
Jump up ^ "Curtea Constitutionala a invalidat referendumul cu scorul 6–3. Traian Basescu revine la Cotroceni". Hotnews. 2012. Archived from the original on 10 October 2016. Retrieved 7 October 2016.
Jump up ^ Bucharest, Ian Traynor Roberta Radu in; agencies-GB (30 July 2012). "Romania's president Basescu survives impeachment vote". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 25 February 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ Claudia POPESCU. "DEINDUSTRIALIZATION AND URBAN SHRINKAGE IN ROMANIA. WHAT LESSONS FOR THE SPATIAL POLICY?". Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 8 October 2016.
Jump up ^ "Statul român a pierdut 20 miliarde de dolari prin privatizarea Petrom". Vocea Rusiei. Archived from the original on 16 September 2016. Retrieved 27 August 2016.
Jump up ^ "Statul a oferit OMV Petrom zacaminte de 14 miliarde de dolari". www.jurnalul.ro. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 27 August 2016.
Jump up ^ "CER | Romania's Unforeseeable Turning Point". www.ce-review.org. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Romania shuts door on Gabriel's giant Rosia Montana gold mine". Financial Post. Archived from the original on 6 April 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Romania PM Ponta resigns over Bucharest nightclub fire Archived 15 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine.". BBC News. 4 November 2015.
Jump up ^ "NATO update: NATO welcomes seven new members". NATO. Archived from the original on 11 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "EU approves Bulgaria and Romania". BBC News. 26 September 2006. Archived from the original on 3 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Adevarul". Adevarul.ro. Archived from the original on 20 September 2008. Retrieved 25 September 2010.
^ Jump up to: a b Human Development Report 2009 – Country Fact Sheets – Romania Archived 1 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine.. Hdrstats.undp.org. Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Tracking the Millennium Development Goal Archived 26 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine.. MDG Monitor. Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Joe Parkinson (4 December 2009). "Romania Faces Crucial Vote". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 10 July 2017.
Jump up ^ Romania and the IMF Archived 9 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Gheorghe Stoica; Lavinia Stan. "Romanian Politics in 2012: Intra-Cabinet Coexistence and Political Instability". South-East European Journal of Political Science. Archived from the original on 24 February 2014.
Jump up ^ "Romania's Infrastructure and International Transport Links". Assessment of the Romanian Economy. Romania Central. Archived from the original on 21 March 2009. Retrieved 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Romania, world's 53rd country in quality of life index « Denisa Morariu[dead link]. Denisamorariu.wordpress.com (8 January 2010). Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ Sistemul de invatamant distrus de lipsa reformelor – Cluj Archived 5 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine.. citynews.ro. Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ D+C 2010/03 – Focus – Roos: In Romania and Bulgaria, civil-society organisations are demanding rule of law – Development and Cooperation – International Journal Archived 9 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine.. Inwent.org. Retrieved on 21 August 2010.
Jump up ^ "Romania is booming". The Economist. 17 December 2013. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017.
Jump up ^ "Human Development Report 2016 – "Human Development for Everyone"" (PDF). HDRO (Human Development Report Office) United Nations Development Programme. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 August 2017. Retrieved 22 March 2017.
^ Jump up to: a b "Romania". Germany: focus-migration.de. Archived from the original on 7 February 2009. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Thorpe, Nick (2 January 2014). "EU migration: Romania's absent parents". BBC. Archived from the original on 17 July 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2016.
Jump up ^ Schmitt, Caroline (27 November 2014). "Mothering via Skype: Europe's absentee parents". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 23 April 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2016.
^ Jump up to: a b "Geography, Meteorology and Environment" (PDF) (in Romanian). Romanian Statistical Yearbook. 2004. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
Jump up ^ "Romania's Biodiversity". Ministry of Waters, Forests and Environmental Protection of Romania (via enrin.grida.no). Archived from the original on 10 February 2008. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Protected Areas in Romania". Romanian Ministry of Waters, Forests and Environmental Protection (via envir.ee). Archived from the original on 17 November 2007. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Danube Delta". UNESCO's World Heritage Centre. Archived from the original on 27 January 2008. Retrieved 9 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Danube Delta Reserve Biosphere". Romanian Ministry of Waters, Forests and Environmental Protection (via envir.ee). Archived from the original on 26 April 2005. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Danube Delta". UNESCO's World Heritage Centre. Archived from the original on 27 January 2008. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ Wohl, Ellen (2010). A World of Rivers: Environmental Change on Ten of the World's Great Rivers. University of Chicago Press. p. 130. ISBN 0-226-90478-4. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015 – via Google Books.
Jump up ^ "Romania". Fao.org. Archived from the original on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b "Flora si fauna salbatica" (in Romanian). enrin.grida.no. Archived from the original on 23 February 2009. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
Jump up ^ "EarthTrends: Biodiversity and Protected Areas – Romania" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 September 2007. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Bears. Status Survey and Conservation Action Plan" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 2 October 2014.
Jump up ^ "Canids: Foxes, Wolves, Jackals and Dogs. Status Survey and Conservation Action Plan" (PDF). IUCN/SSC Canid Specialist Group. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 2 October 2014.
Jump up ^ "Romania: Climate". U.S. Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 23 September 2006. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b "Permafrost Monitoring and Prediction in Southern Carpathians, Romania". CliC International Project Office (CIPO). 22 December 2004. Archived from the original on 16 May 2011. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "The 2004 Yearbook" (PDF) (in Romanian). Romanian National Institute of Statistics. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Clima Romaniei | Site-ul Administratiei Nationale de Meteorologie Archived 22 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Klimatafel von Rumänien". Baseline climate means (1961–1990) from stations all over the world (in German). Deutscher Wetterdienst. Archived from the original on 24 July 2015. Retrieved 20 December 2016.
Jump up ^ Verheijen, Tony (14 March 1990). "Oxford Scholarship Online: Semi-Presidentialism in Europe". Oxfordscholarship.com. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b c d Romania. The Europa World Year Book. 2 (48 ed.). London and New York: Routledge. 2007. pp. 3734–3759. ISBN 978-1-85743-412-5.
Jump up ^ "Se schimba sistemul de vot. Deputa?ii au adoptat noua Lege Electorala propusa de USL". Antena3.ro. Archived from the original on 31 October 2012. Retrieved 12 October 2012.
Jump up ^ "Presentation". High Court of Cassation and Justice -—Romania. Archived from the original on 10 September 2012. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romanian Legal system". CIA Factbook. 2000. Archived from the original on 25 January 2008. Retrieved 11 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Understanding the WTO – members". WTO. Archived from the original on 17 January 2010. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
^ Jump up to: a b c d "Foreign Policy Priorities of Romania for 2008" (in Romanian). Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 14 September 2008. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Background Note: Romania – U.S.-Romanian Relations". U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 8 April 2008.
Jump up ^ [2] Archived 12 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Gabriel Andreescu; Valentin Stan; Renate Weber (30 October 1994). "Romania'S Relations with the Republic of Moldova". International Studies. Centre for International Studies. Archived from the original on 23 February 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Ihrig, Stefan. "Rediscovering History, Rediscovering Ultimate Truth" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 October 2008. Retrieved 17 September 2008.
Jump up ^ "Moldova, Romania open new chapter in bilateral relations". People's Daily. 29 April 2010. Archived from the original on 18 May 2013. Retrieved 11 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Press conference" (Press release). Ministry of National Defense of Romania. 21 January 2003. Archived from the original on 3 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "MoND Budget as of 2007" (in Romanian). Ziarul Financiar. 30 October 2006. Archived from the original on 22 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romania Finally Settles On Portuguese F-16s" Archived 6 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "PICTURES: Romania accepts first C-27J Spartans-12/04/2010-London". Flightglobal.com. Archived from the original on 15 April 2010. Retrieved 28 September 2010.
Jump up ^ "Spartan Order". Aviation Week & Space Technology. 11 December 2006.
Jump up ^ "Romania: 2 soldiers killed, 1 injured in Afghanistan". Colorado Springs Gazette. Associated Press. 7 May 2016. Archived from the original on 17 August 2016. Retrieved 7 July 2016.
Jump up ^ "Romania To Send 450 More Troops To Afghanistan". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 21 December 2014. Archived from the original on 19 September 2016. Retrieved 7 July 2016.
Jump up ^ "Romania ends combat mission in Afghanistan with visit from Prime Minister". Associated Press. 30 June 2014. Archived from the original on 14 October 2017. Retrieved 7 July 2016.
Jump up ^ "Traian Basescu: Romania va trimite fregata Regele Ferdinand cu 205 militari in Mediterana pentru operatiuni de blocare a oricarei nave suspecte ca transporta armament" (in Romanian). HotNews.ro. 22 March 2011. Archived from the original on 25 March 2011. Retrieved 22 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Romania ratifies US missile shield agreement". SpaceWar. 6 December 2012. Archived from the original on 2 February 2013.
Jump up ^ "Geografia Romaniei" (in Romanian). descopera.net. Archived from the original on 19 February 2009. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
^ Jump up to: a b "1.8". Administrative Organisation of Romanian Territory, on December 31, 2005 (PDF) (Report) (in Romanian). Romanian National Institute of Statistics. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b "Hierarchical list of the Nomenclature of territorial units for statistics – NUTS and the Statistical regions of Europe". Archived from the original on 18 January 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "LEGE nr. 151 din 15 iulie 1998" (in Romanian). Archived from the original on 2 December 2013. Retrieved 1 July 2012.
Jump up ^ "2011 Regions Population". INSSE. 4 July 2013. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013. Retrieved 9 July 2013.
^ Jump up to: a b "Population at 20 October 2011" (in Romanian). INSSE. 5 July 2013. Retrieved 5 July 2013.[dead link]
Jump up ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 21 April 2017., IMF World Economic Outlook Database, April 2017
Jump up ^ World Bank – Data for Romania 2016 Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "GDP per capita, consumption per capita and price level indices". Archived from the original on 2 July 2017. Retrieved 13 June 2017.
Jump up ^ "GDP in 2006" (PDF) (in Romanian). Romanian National Institute of Statistics. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 February 2008. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ nytimes.com: "Romania to Get Next Installment of Bailout" 1 Nov 2010 Archived 31 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Veste excelenta pentru Romania de la Banca Mondiala (Video)". Archived from the original on 18 June 2014. Retrieved 11 June 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b "In January 2017, the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was estimated at 5.4%" (PDF) (Press release). National Institute of Statistics. 31 January 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 March 2017. Retrieved 9 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "Average gross earnings in Romania" (PDF). 16 March 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "Eurostat, HICP – monthly data (12-month average rate of change)". Eurostat. Archived from the original on 5 March 2017. Retrieved 5 March 2017.
Jump up ^ Industrial production up by 0.4% in euro area and EU27|Eurostat. Eurostat (12 April 2013). Retrieved on 13 May 2013.
Jump up ^ Chirileasa, Andrei (9 June 2014). "Top 20 companies in Romania by turnover". Romania-Insider.com. Archived from the original on 12 June 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "IMF World Economic Outlook Database, April 2011 – Central and Eastern Europe". IMF. April 2011. Archived from the original on 15 October 2011. Retrieved 27 April 2011.
Jump up ^ "Index of Economic Freedom: Romania". heritage.org. Archived from the original on 5 January 2005. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Taxation trends in the EU (PDF) (Report). Eurostat. 26 June 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romania". CIA World Factbook. 2010. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011. Retrieved 27 April 2011.
Jump up ^ "Romania: FDI reached over EUR 8.3 bn". Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Economy Ranking. Doing Business (Report). World Bank. 2007. Archived from the original on 15 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Doing Business 2007 Report (Report). World Bank. Archived from the original on 8 March 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Fifth Report on the Practical Preparations for the Future Enlargement of the Euro Area" (PDF). Commission of the European Communities. 16 July 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 October 2007. Retrieved 31 May 2013.
Jump up ^ "Banca Na?ionala a României". bnr.ro. Archived from the original on 30 September 2015. Retrieved 29 September 2015.
Jump up ^ "Length of roads in Romania 2015" (PDF). INSSE. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 November 2016. Retrieved 16 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "Reteaua feroviara" (in Romanian). cfr.to. Archived from the original on 8 June 2009. Retrieved 6 September 2009.
Jump up ^ "Metrorex ridership" (in Romanian). Financial Week newspaper. 23 April 2007. Archived from the original on 16 May 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Ann.aero database Archived 26 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Jump up to: a b c [[[List of countries by electricity consumption]] "List of countries by electricity consumption"] Check |url= value (help). Retrieved 20 February 2017.
Jump up ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 December 2015. Retrieved 9 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Raport Anual 2015 energie" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 20 February 2017.
Jump up ^ Ana Hontz-Ward. "Romania Expects to be Energy Independent Despite Ukraine Crisis". Voanews.com. Archived from the original on 18 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Contractul pentru unitatile 3 si 4 de la centrala nucleara Cernavoda se va parafa in mai. Chinezii v-or avea 51% din actiuni – Nicolae Moga (PSD) – Energie – HotNews.ro". Economie.hotnews.ro. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Numarul conexiunilor la internet a crescut cu 22,8%. Câte milioane de români au acces la internet". Gândul. 4 December 2014. Archived from the original on 9 April 2015.
Jump up ^ • Chart: Blistering BroadBand: Europe's fastest downloaders -> Statista Archived 22 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Top 10: Where to Find the World's Fastest Internet". Bloomberg. 23 January 2013. Archived from the original on 28 June 2016.
Jump up ^ "Romanian city comes out first in the world in Internet download speed ranking". Net Index. 3 July 2013. Archived from the original on 6 July 2013.
Jump up ^ "Country/Economy Profiles: Romania, Page 329 Travel&Tourism" (PDF). World Economic Forum. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 April 2013. Retrieved 16 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "WTTC spells out policy recommendations for Romania to tap travel and tourism potential". WTTC. Retrieved 11 January 2008.[dead link]
Jump up ^ "Worldbank Tourism in Romania". worldbank.org. Archived from the original on 25 August 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Tourism attracted in 2005 investments worth €400 million" (in Romanian). Gandul Newspaper. Retrieved 11 January 2008.[dead link]
Jump up ^ Report from Romanian National Institute of Statistics (PDF) (Report). Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 February 2008. Retrieved 11 January 2008. for the first 9 months of 2007 an increase from the previous year of 8.7% to 16.5 million tourists; of these 94.0% came from European countries and 61.7% from EU
Jump up ^ Criza ne strica vacan?a Archived 2 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine., 9 July 2010, jurnalul.ro, accessed on 21 August 2010
Jump up ^ "Tan and fun at the Black Sea". UnseenRomania. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 10 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Castelul Bran, marcat de istorie, dar si de legenda lui Dracula atrage anual sute de mii de turisti". www.digi24.ro. Archived from the original on 22 August 2016. Retrieved 28 June 2016.
Jump up ^ "Turismul renaste la tara" (in Romanian). Romania Libera. 5 July 2008. Archived from the original on 2 August 2008. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Bine ati venit pe site-ul de promovare a pensiunilor agroturistice din Romania !!!" (in Romanian). RuralTourism.ro. Archived from the original on 14 September 2008. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Turism in Romania". Turism.ro. Archived from the original on 2 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Ansamblul sculptural Constantin Brancusi din Targu Jiu". Romaniaturistica.com. 16 March 1957. Archived from the original on 9 September 2012. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ How important is tourism in Romania’s economy? Archived 6 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
^ Jump up to: a b Over 1.9 million tourists visit Romania, where do they come from – Romania Insider Archived 4 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Traian Vuia in a Century of Aviation". Romanian Academy Library. p. 1. Archived from the original on 27 July 2013. Retrieved 7 August 2012.
Jump up ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 9 February 2011.
Jump up ^ "Laserul de la Magurele: Institutul de Cercetare pentru Fizica si Inginerie Nucleara a semnat contractul de 66 milioane euro pentru realizarea Sistemului Fascicul Gamma – Esential". HotNews.ro. Archived from the original on 11 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Bulgaria: Science fortunes of Balkan neighbours diverge – Novinite.com – Sofia News Agency". Novinite.com. 13 January 2011. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Science fortunes of Balkan neighbours diverge : Nature News". Nature.com. Archived from the original on 16 January 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Funeriu: Stiinta din Romania 'se imbunatateste', insa mai sunt multe lucruri de facut". Epochtimes-romania.com. 13 January 2011. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Romania is to sign agreement on joining European space agency convention". Actmedia.eu. 20 January 2011. Archived from the original on 24 January 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Romania's high hopes for science : Nature News". Nature.com. Archived from the original on 19 March 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "ELI-NP | Extreme Light Infrastructure – Nuclear Physics". Eli-np.ro. Archived from the original on 6 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "VIDEO Romania's first satellite Goliat successfully launch from Kourou base in French Guyana – Top News". HotNews.ro. Archived from the original on 6 April 2014. Retrieved 4 April 2014.
Jump up ^ "Romania will own a part of the International Space Station and will contribute to the development of the latest European rocket, Ariane 6". Romanian Space Agency. 3 December 2014. Archived from the original on 8 December 2014.
Jump up ^ "European effort spotlights plight of the Roma". usatoday. 10 February 2005. Archived from the original on 23 January 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b Official site of the results of the 2002 Census (Report) (in Romanian). Archived from the original on 5 February 2012. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "German Population of Romania, 1930–1948". hungarian-history.hu. Archived from the original on 17 August 2007. Retrieved 7 September 2009.
^ Jump up to: a b The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency Archived 24 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Eurostat – Tables, Graphs and Maps Interface (TGM) table Archived 27 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Villeret, Graeme. "Roumanie". PopulationData.net. Archived from the original on 15 March 2016. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Romania demographics profile (2011)". Indexmundi.com. 12 July 2011. Archived from the original on 8 November 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "CIA World Factbook: Romania". Cia.gov. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013. Retrieved 2 October 2013.
Jump up ^ "Focus-Migration: Romania". focus-migration.hwwi.de (in German). Archived from the original on 20 July 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ MIGRATION AND ASYLUM IN CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE Archived 16 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine. European Parliament
Jump up ^ "2011 census results by native language" (xls). www.recensamantromania.ro, website of the Romanian Institute of Statistics. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 5 May 2015.
Jump up ^ "IARNA UCRAINEANA – Afla care sunt localita?ile din Maramure? în care se praznuiesc sarbatorile de iarna dupa rit vechi" [Ukrainian winter: find out in which communes of Maramure? are the Winter holidays celebrated by the old calendar], Infomm.ro, archived from the original on 18 May 2015, retrieved 5 May 2015
Jump up ^ "Constitutia României". Cdep.ro. Archived from the original on 7 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Two-thirds of working age adults in the EU28 in 2011 state they know a foreign language" (PDF). Eurostat. 26 September 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 September 2013. Retrieved 21 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Roumanie – Organisation internationale de la Francophonie". francophonie.org. Archived from the original on 14 March 2017.
Jump up ^ "EUROPEANS AND THEIR LANGUAGES, REPORT" (PDF). Eurostat. 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 21 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "2011 census results by religion" (xls). www.recensamantromania.ro, website of the Romanian Institute of Statistics. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 5 May 2015.
Jump up ^ Profiles of the Eastern Churches Archived 29 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine. at cnewa.org
Jump up ^ European Court of Human Rights – Case of Metropolitan Church of Bessarabia Archived 30 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Urbanization of Romania: how urban population increased from 3.7 million in 1948 to 12 million in 1989". Businessday.ro. Archived from the original on 22 April 2014. Retrieved 24 April 2012.
Jump up ^ "Urban Audit". Urban Audit. Archived from the original on 31 May 2013. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Proiect – Zona metropolitana Bucuresti". Zmb.ro. Archived from the original on 2 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Metropolitan Zone of Bucharest will be ready in 10 years" (in Romanian). Romania Libera. Archived from the original on 3 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Official site of Metropolitan Zone of Bucharest Project" (in Romanian). Archived from the original on 2 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Population at 20 October 2011" (in Romanian). INSSE. 5 July 2013. Retrieved 5 July 2013.
Jump up ^ The Romanian Educational Policy in Transition (Report). UNESCO. Archived from the original on 2 October 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Romanian Institute of Statistics Yearbook – Chapter 8" (PDF) (in Romanian). Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 August 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "UN Human Development Report 2006" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 February 2007.
Jump up ^ Clasa pregatitoare, obligatorie din septembrie. Ce vor învata copiii si cum vor fi evaluati – Mediafax Archived 26 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ The Romanian Educational Policy in Transition (Report). UNESCO. Archived from the original on 1 October 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Limited relevants. What feminists can learn from the eastern experience" (PDF). genderomania.ro. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2008. Retrieved 25 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Rezultate PISA 2012: Aproape 40% dintre elevii romani au dificultati sa citeasca si sa inteleaga un text si pot rezolva doar exercitii de baza la Matematica (Report). Hotnews.ro. 3 December 2013. Archived from the original on 9 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Over 40pct of Romania's children struggling with functional literacy | Nine O`Clock". www.nineoclock.ro-US. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 21 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Romania's brains rank first in Europe, 10th in the world after Math Olympiad" (in Romanian). romania-insider.com. 16 July 2012. Archived from the original on 18 July 2012.
Jump up ^ "Romanian students win four medals, two gold, at the European Girls Mathematical Olympiad". business-review.eu. 16 April 2014. Archived from the original on 9 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Romanian students win 32 medals at SEEMOUS International Mathematical Olympiad". AGERPRES. 11 March 2014. Archived from the original on 8 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "QS World University Rankings 2013". topuniversities.com. October 2013. Archived from the original on 21 October 2016. All four universities are ranked at 700+ which means they are ranked among the 701–800 places.
Jump up ^ "Ritli: Ministry of Health budget for 2012 can provide the assistance at least at the level of previous year" Archived 24 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine., Mediafax.ro
Jump up ^ "Romania, 4th in Europe in TB" Archived 24 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine., România Libera
Jump up ^ "Our patients vs. theirs: How many hospitals has Romania compared to other EU countries", Wall-Street.ro
Jump up ^ "Fewer hospital beds for sick Romanians" Archived 5 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine., România Libera
Jump up ^ "Personalul medico-sanitar pe categorii, forme de proprietate, sexe, macroregiuni, regiuni de dezvoltare ?i jude?e" Archived 23 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine., Institutul Na?ional de Statistica
Jump up ^ "«De profesie: medic în România». Cum încearca ministrul Nicolaescu sa-i ?ina pe doctori în ?ara" Archived 1 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine., Adevarul, 2 April 2013
Jump up ^ "Cultural aspects". National Institute for Research & Development in Informatics, Romania. Archived from the original on 7 March 2008. Retrieved 28 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Mihai Eminescu" (in Romanian). National Institute for Research & Development in Informatics, Romania. Archived from the original on 31 December 2007. Retrieved 20 January 2008.
Jump up ^ Tom Sandqvist, DADA EAST: The Romanians of Cabaret Voltaire, London MIT Press, 2006.
Jump up ^ ?tefanescu, Alex. (1999). Nichita Stanescu, The Angel with a Book in His Hands (in Romanian). Ma?ina de scris. p. 8. ISBN 978-973-99297-4-5.
Jump up ^ "Brancusi's 'Bird in Space' Sets World Auction Record for Sculpture at $27,456,000". Antiques and the Arts Online. Archived from the original on 13 February 2006. Retrieved 20 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "November 9, The price record for a Brancusi masterpiece was set up in 2005 when "Bird in Space" was sold for USD 27.5 M". Romanian Information Center in Brussels. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 20 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "George Enescu, the composer". International Enescu Society. Archived from the original on 19 October 2007. Retrieved 20 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Sounds Like Canada feat. Gheorghe Zamfir". CBC Radio. 17 January 2006. Archived from the original on 28 April 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Gheorghe Zamfir, master of the pan pipe". Gheorghe Zamfir, Official Homepage. Archived from the original on 30 October 2007. Retrieved 20 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Inna Biography". BBC. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2013.
Jump up ^ "10 One-Hit Wonders to Be or Not to Be?". vh1.i. 7 March 2014. Archived from the original on 13 March 2014.
Jump up ^ Arsenie, Dan. "Paula Seling despre rezultatul la Eurovision 2010: "Mai bine de atât nu se putea!"". EVZ.ro. Archived from the original on 28 August 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Cannes 2007 Winners". Alternative Film Guide. Archived from the original on 4 July 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Mike Collett-White (16 February 2013). "Romanian film "Child's Pose" wins Berlin Golden Bear". Reuters. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015.
Jump up ^ "World Heritage Site – Romania". UNESCO. Archived from the original on 31 October 2004. Retrieved 31 January 2008.
Jump up ^ "Report on the Nominations from Luxembourg and Romania for the European Capital of Culture 2007" (PDF). The Selection Panel for the European Capital of Culture (ECOC) 2007. 5 April 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
Jump up ^ "Muzeul National Peles | Site-ul oficial al castelelor Peles si Pelisor". Peles.ro. Archived from the original on 28 August 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Castelul Bran". Viaromania.eu. Archived from the original on 8 October 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Public holidays enacted by labour code" Archived 18 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine., Labor code, 22 March 2017
Jump up ^ Improve It Grup S.R.L. "Traditii si obiceiuri romanesti. Artizanat traditional romanesc. Arta populara". Traditii.ro. Archived from the original on 3 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ Insider, Romania (21 December 2012). "Winter holidays and Christmas traditions in Romania: the Bear dance, the Masked carolers and the Goat". Romania-Insider.com. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "ROMANIA – Traditions and Folklore – Official Travel and Tourism Information". Romaniatourism.com. Archived from the original on 23 July 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Ministrul Agriculturii: UE accepta ca mieii de Pasti si porcii de Craciun sa fie sacrificati in mod traditional – Actualitate". HotNews.ro. 11 August 2014. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ Martisor, a Spring celebration for Eastern Europeans (29 June 2014). "Martisor, a Spring celebration for Eastern Europeans". Foreigners In Uk. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Christina Bradatan, Cuisine and Cultural Identity in Balkans". Scholarworks.iu.edu. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ Recipes, Gourmet European. "Romanian Recipes – like mom used to make". www.gourmet-european-recipes.com-gb. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "28 Romanian Foods The Whole World Should Know – oneJive". onejive.com-US. Archived from the original on 12 August 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017.
Jump up ^ "Retete traditionale Moldova: retete peste sau cu carne de porc". Bucataras.ro. 15 December 2008. Archived from the original on 5 January 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Bucatarie romaneasca – Cultura si retete – Articole". Gastronomie.ele.ro. Archived from the original on 30 April 2007. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "?uica production consumed 75% of Romanian plums in 2003". Regard-est.com. Archived from the original on 29 September 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2011.
Jump up ^ "Study in Romania". Educations.com. 5 February 2008. Archived from the original on 28 December 2010. Retrieved 14 March 2011.
Jump up ^ "Beer consumption per capita in 2008". kirinholdings.co.jp. Retrieved 17 March 2017.[permanent dead link]
Jump up ^ "Topul sporturilor în func?ie de numarul de sportivi legitima?i". zf.ro. 12 January 2012. Archived from the original on 9 April 2015.
Jump up ^ "Romania: FIFA/Coca-Cola World Ranking". FIFA.com. Archived from the original on 3 July 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Hagi leaves Romania post". BBC Sport. 26 November 2001. Archived from the original on 22 January 2003. Retrieved 31 August 2008. Hagi earned a legendary status in Romania where he spearheaded the 'Golden Generation' of players ...
Jump up ^ "Hagi snubs Maradona". BBC Sport Online. 6 April 2001. Archived from the original on 19 December 2008. Retrieved 31 August 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b c "Romania". The Europa World Year Book. 2. Routledge. 2007.
Jump up ^ Rankings | WTA Tennis English Archived 12 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Rio 2016 – Tennis: Mergea and Tecau win silver in men's doubles tournament", Agerpres, 13 August 2016, archived from the original on 19 August 2017, retrieved 25 August 2016
^ Jump up to: a b "What's the most popular sport in Romania?". cesport.eu. Archived from the original on 6 August 2016. Retrieved 29 May 2016.
Jump up ^ "Cristina Neagu – World Handball Player of the Year 2010". Ihf.info. 13 January 2011. Archived from the original on 2 December 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2014.
Jump up ^ "Originea jocului de Oina – Sport National Roman". Oina.ro. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up ^ "Recurs la ISTORIE: De ce s-a "prabu?it" România la Olimpiada de la Londra?". adevarul.ro. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.
Jump up


Moldavia
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about the historical principality. For the modern state, see Moldova. For other uses, see Moldavia (disambiguation).
Principality of Moldavia
Moldova (?ara Moldovei)  (Romanian)
1346–1859	
Flag
Flag
Coat of arms
Coat of arms

Moldavia under Stephen the Great, 1483
Capital	Baia, Siret 1343–1388
Suceava 1388–1564
Ia?i (Jassy) from 1564
Languages	Romanian (Old Romanian)[1][2] (also named as Moldovan[3][4][5]), Old Church Slavonic (in early official use)
Religion	Eastern Orthodox
Minority [show]
Government	Principality
Princes of Moldavia (Voivodes, Hospodars)	
 • 	1346–1353 (first)	Drago?
 • 	1859–1862 (last)	Alexandru Ioan Cuza
History	
 • 	Foundation of the Moldavian mark	1346
 • 	De jure union with Wallachia	5 February [O.S. 24 January] 1859
Currency	Taler
Succeeded by
United Principalities	
Duchy of Bukovina	
Bessarabia Governorate	
Today part of	
 Moldova
 Romania
 Ukraine
Part of a series on the
History of Romania
Coat of arms of Romania
Prehistory[show]
Antiquity[show]
Middle Ages (Early)[show]
Early Modern Times[show]
National Awakening[show]
Kingdom of Romania[show]
Socialist Republic of Romania[show]
Post-Revolution[show]
By topic[show]
By historical region[show]
Commons
Centuries in Romania
Flag of Romania.svg Romania portal
v t e
Part of a series on the
History of Moldova
Coat of arms of Moldova
Antiquity[show]
Early Middle Ages[show]
Principality of Moldavia[show]
Bessarabia Governorate[show]
Moldavian Democratic Republic[show]
Greater Romania[show]
Moldavian ASSR[show]
Moldavian SSR[show]
Republic of Moldova[show]
Flag of Moldova.svg Moldova portal
v t e
Moldavia (Romanian: Moldova, pronounced [mol'dova] (About this sound listen) or ?ara Moldovei (in Romanian Latin alphabet), ???? ???????? (in old Romanian Cyrillic alphabet)) is a historical region and former principality in Eastern Europe, corresponding to the territory between the Eastern Carpathians and the Dniester River. An initially independent and later autonomous state, it existed from the 14th century to 1859, when it united with Wallachia (?ara Româneasca) as the basis of the modern Romanian state; at various times, Moldavia included the regions of Bessarabia (with the Budjak), all of Bukovina and Hertza.

The western half of Moldavia is now part of Romania, the eastern side belongs to the Republic of Moldova, while the northern and southeastern parts are territories of Ukraine.

Contents  [hide] 
1	Name and etymology
2	History
2.1	Prehistory and antiquity
2.2	Early Middle Ages
2.3	High Middle Ages
2.4	Late Middle Ages
2.5	Early Modern Era and Renaissance
2.6	Phanariots (1711–1822)
2.7	Fragmentation
2.8	Organic Statute, 1848 revolution
2.9	Southern Bessarabia
2.10	Union with Wallachia
3	Society
3.1	Slavery
4	Military forces
4.1	Fleet
4.2	Flags and historical coats of arms
5	Geography
5.1	Administrative divisions
6	Population
6.1	Historical population
6.2	Cities
7	Education
8	Culture
8.1	Literature
8.2	Magazines and newspapers
8.3	Theatre
8.4	Architecture
9	Image gallery
10	See also
11	References
12	External links
Name and etymology[edit]
Main article: Etymology of Moldova
The original and short-lived reference to the region was Bogdania, after Bogdan I, the founding figure of the principality. The names Moldavia and Moldova are derived from the name of the Moldova River; however, the etymology is not known and there are several variants:[6][7]

a legend mentioned in Descriptio Moldaviae by Dimitrie Cantemir links it to an aurochs hunting trip of the Maramure? voivode Drago? and the latter's chase of a star-marked bull. Drago? was accompanied by his female hound called Molda; when they reached the shores of an unfamiliar river, Molda caught up with the animal and was killed by it. The dog's name would have been given to the river and extended to the country.
the old German Molde, meaning "open-pit mine"
the Gothic Mulda (Gothic: ??????????, Runic: ?????) meaning "dust", "dirt" (cognate with the English mould), referring to the river.
a Slavic etymology (-ova is a quite common Slavic suffix), marking the end of one Slavic genitive form, denoting ownership, chiefly of feminine nouns (i.e., "that of Molda").
A landowner named Alexa Moldaowicz is mentioned in a 1334 document as a local boyar in service to Yuriy II of Halych; this attests to the use of the name before the foundation of the Moldavian state and could be the source for the region's name.[citation needed]
In several early references,[8] "Moldavia" is rendered under the composite form Moldo-Wallachia (in the same way Wallachia may appear as Hungro-Wallachia). Ottoman Turkish references to Moldavia included Bogdan Iflak (meaning "Bogdan's Wallachia") and Bogdan (and occasionally Kara-Bogdan – "Black Bogdania"). See also names in other languages.

The name of the region in other languages include French: Moldavie, German: Moldau, Hungarian: Moldva, Russian: ???????? (Moldaviya), Turkish: Bogdan Prensligi, Greek: ???daß?a.

History[edit]

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Prehistory and antiquity[edit]
Main articles: Prehistory of the Balkans, Cucuteni-Trypillian culture, Getae, Dacians, Costoboci, Carpi (people), Dacia, Trajan's Dacian Wars, and Roman Dacia
Early Middle Ages[edit]
Main articles: Origin of the Romanians and Romania in the Early Middle Ages
The inhabitants of Moldova were Christians. Archaeological works revealed the remains of a Christian necropolis at Mihala?eni, Boto?ani county, from the 5th century. The place of worship, and the tombs had Christian characteristics. The place of worship had a rectangular form with sides of 8 and 7 meters. Similar necropolis and place of worship were found at Nicolina, in Ia?i[9]

The Bolohoveni, a Vlach population, is mentioned by the Hypatian Chronicle in the 13th century. The chronicle shows that this land is bordered on the principalities of Halych, Volhynia and Kiev. Archaeological research also identified the location of 13th-century fortified settlements in this region. Alexandru V. Boldur identified Voscodavie, Voscodavti, Voloscovti, Volcovti, Volosovca and their other towns and villages between the middle course of the rivers Nistru/Dniester and Nipru/Dnieper.[10] The Bolohoveni disappeared from chronicles after their defeat in 1257 by Daniil Romanovich's troops.

In the early 13th century, the Brodniks, a possible Slavic–Vlach vassal state of Halych, were present, alongside the Vlachs, in much of the region's territory (towards 1216, the Brodniks are mentioned as in service of Suzdal).

On the border between Halych and the Brodniks, in the 11th century, a Viking by the name of Rodfos was killed in the area by Vlachs who supposedly betrayed him.[11] In 1164, the future Byzantine Emperor Andronikos I Komnenos, was taken prisoner by Vlach shepherds around the same region.

High Middle Ages[edit]
Main article: Foundation of Moldavia
See also: Romania in the Middle Ages, Transylvania in the Middle Ages, and Wallachia in the Middle Ages

Ruins of the Roman Catholic cathedral at Baia

The Seat Fortress in Suceava

Neam? Citadel in Târgu Neam?

Soroca Fort in Soroca
Later in the 14th century, King Charles I of Hungary attempted to expand his realm and the influence of the Catholic Church eastwards after the fall of Cuman rule, and ordered a campaign under the command of Phynta de Mende (1324). In 1342 and 1345, the Hungarians were victorious in a battle against Tatar-Mongols; the conflict was resolved by the death of Jani Beg, in 1357. The Polish chronicler Jan Dlugosz mentioned Moldavians (under the name Wallachians) as having joined a military expedition in 1342, under King Wladyslaw I, against the Margraviate of Brandenburg.[12]

In 1353, Drago?, mentioned as a Vlach Knyaz in Maramure?, was sent by Louis I to establish a line of defense against the Golden Horde forces of Mongols on the Siret River. This expedition resulted in a polity vassal to Hungary, centered around Baia (Târgul Moldovei or Moldvabánya).

Bogdan of Cuhea, another Vlach voivode from Maramure? who had fallen out with the Hungarian king, crossed the Carpathians in 1359, took control of Moldavia, and succeeded in removing Moldavia from Hungarian control. His realm extended north to the Cheremosh River, while the southern part of Moldavia was still occupied by the Tatar Mongols.

After first residing in Baia, Bogdan moved Moldavia's seat to Siret (it was to remain there until Petru Mu?at moved it to Suceava; it was finally moved to Ia?i under Alexandru Lapu?neanu - in 1565). The area around Suceava, roughly correspondent to future Bukovina, formed one of the two administrative divisions of the new realm, under the name ?ara de Sus (the "Upper Land"), whereas the rest, on both sides of the Prut river, formed ?ara de Jos (the "Lower Land").

Disfavored by the brief union of Angevin Poland and Hungary (the latter was still the country's overlord), Bogdan's successor La?cu accepted conversion to Roman Catholicism around 1370, but his gesture was to remain without consequences. Despite remaining officially Eastern Orthodox and culturally connected with the Byzantine Empire after 1382, princes of the House of Bogdan-Mu?at entered a conflict with the Constantinople Patriarchy over control of appointments to the newly founded Moldavian Metropolitan seat; Patriarch Antony IV even cast an anathema over Moldavia after Roman I expelled his appointee back to Byzantium. The crisis was finally settled in favor of the Moldavian princes under Alexander I. Nevertheless, religious policy remained complex: while conversions to faiths other than Orthodox were discouraged (and forbidden for princes), Moldavia included sizable Roman Catholic communities (Germans and Magyars), as well as non-Chalcedonic Armenians; after 1460, the country welcomed Hussite refugees (founders of Ciuburciu and, probably, Hu?i).

The principality of Moldavia covered the entire geographic region of Moldavia. In various periods, various other territories were politically connected with the Moldavian principality. This is the case of the province of Pokuttya, the fiefdoms of Cetatea de Balta and Ciceu (both in Transylvania) or, at a later date, the territories between the Dniester and the Bug rivers.

Petru I profited from the end of the Hungarian-Polish union and moved the country closer to the Jagiellon realm, becoming a vassal of Wladyslaw II on September 26, 1387. This gesture was to have unexpected consequences: Petru supplied the Polish ruler with funds needed in the war against the Teutonic Knights, and was granted control over Pokuttya until the debt was to be repaid; as this is not recorded to have been carried out, the region became disputed by the two states, until it was lost by Moldavia in the Battle of Obertyn (1531). Prince Petru also expanded his rule southwards to the Danube Delta. His brother Roman I conquered the Hungarian-ruled Cetatea Alba in 1392, giving Moldavia an outlet to the Black Sea, before being toppled from the throne for supporting Fyodor Koriatovych in his conflict with Vytautas the Great of Lithuania. Under Stephen I, growing Polish influence was challenged by Sigismund of Hungary, whose expedition was defeated at Ghindaoani in 1385; however, Stephen disappeared in mysterious circumstances.

Although Alexander I was brought to the throne in 1400 by the Hungarians (with assistance from Mircea I of Wallachia), he shifted his allegiances towards Poland (notably engaging Moldavian forces on the Polish side in the Battle of Grunwald and the Siege of Marienburg), and placed his own choice of rulers in Wallachia. His reign was one of the most successful in Moldavia's history, but also saw the very first confrontation with the Ottoman Turks at Cetatea Alba in 1420, and later even a conflict with the Poles. A deep crisis was to follow Alexandru's long reign, with his successors battling each other in a succession of wars that divided the country until the murder of Bogdan II and the ascension of Peter III Aaron in 1451. Nevertheless, Moldavia was subject to further Hungarian interventions after that moment, as Matthias Corvinus deposed Aron and backed Alexandrel to the throne in Suceava. Petru Aron's rule also signified the beginning of Moldavia's Ottoman Empire allegiance, as the ruler agreed to pay tribute to Sultan Mehmed II.

Late Middle Ages[edit]
Main article: Stephen the Great
See also: Moldavian–Ottoman Wars

Equestrian statue of Moldavian Prince Stephen the Great in Suceava
Under Stephen the Great, who took the throne and subsequently came to an agreement with Kazimierz IV of Poland in 1457, the state reached its most glorious period. Stephen blocked Hungarian interventions in the Battle of Baia, invaded Wallachia in 1471, and dealt with Ottoman reprisals in a major victory (the 1475 Battle of Vaslui); after feeling threatened by Polish ambitions, he also attacked Galicia and resisted Polish reprisals in the Battle of the Cosmin Forest (1497). However, he had to surrender Chilia (Kiliya) and Cetatea Alba (Bilhorod-Dnistrovskyi), the two main fortresses in the Budjak, to the Ottomans in 1484, and in 1498 he had to accept Ottoman suzerainty, when he was forced to agree to continue paying tribute to Sultan Bayezid II. Following the taking of Hotin (Khotyn) and Pokuttya, Stephen's rule also brought a brief extension of Moldavian rule into Transylvania: Cetatea de Balta and Ciceu became his fiefs in 1489.

Early Modern Era and Renaissance[edit]
Main article: Early Modern Romania
See also: Early Modern Wallachia and Early Modern Transylvania

Hotin Fortress on the Dniester River, bordering the northern frontier
Under Bogdan III the One-Eyed, Ottoman overlordship was confirmed in the shape that would rapidly evolve into control over Moldavia's affairs. Peter IV Rare?, who reigned in the 1530s and 1540s, clashed with the Habsburg Monarchy over his ambitions in Transylvania (losing possessions in the region to George Martinuzzi), was defeated in Pokuttya by Poland, and failed in his attempt to extricate Moldavia from Ottoman rule – the country lost Bender to the Ottomans, who included it in their Silistra Eyalet.

A period of profound crisis followed. Moldavia stopped issuing its own coinage circa 1520, under Prince ?tefani?a, when it was confronted with rapid depletion of funds and rising demands from the Porte. Such problems became endemic when the country, brought into the Great Turkish War, suffered the impact of the stagnation of the Ottoman Empire; at one point, during the 1650s and 1660s, princes began relying on counterfeit coinage (usually copies of Swedish riksdalers, as was that issued by Eustratie Dabija). The economic decline was accompanied by a failure to maintain state structures: the feudal-based Moldavian military forces were no longer convoked, and the few troops maintained by the rulers remained professional mercenaries such as the seimeni.


Trei Ierarhi Monastery in Ia?i, housed the Vasilian College, an institution of higher learning founded in 1640

In 1600, Michael the Brave became Prince of Wallachia, of Transylvania, and of Moldavia
However, Moldavia and the similarly affected Wallachia remained both important sources of income for the Ottoman Empire and relatively prosperous agricultural economies (especially as suppliers of grain and cattle – the latter was especially relevant in Moldavia, which remained an under-populated country of pastures). In time, much of the resources were tied to the Ottoman economy, either through monopolies on trade that were only lifted in 1829, after the Treaty of Adrianople (which did not affect all domains directly), or through the raise in direct taxes - the one demanded by the Ottomans from the princes, as well as the ones demanded by the princes from the country's population. Taxes were directly proportional with Ottoman requests, but also with the growing importance of Ottoman appointment and sanctioning of princes in front of election by the boyars and the boyar Council – Sfatul boieresc (drawing in a competition among pretenders, which also implied the intervention of creditors as suppliers of bribes). The fiscal system soon included taxes such as the vacarit (a tax on head of cattle), first introduced by Iancu Sasul in the 1580s.

The economic opportunities offered brought about a significant influx of Greek and Levantine financiers and officials, who entered a stiff competition with the high boyars over appointments to the Court. As the manor system suffered the blows of economic crises, and in the absence of salarisation (which implied that persons in office could decide their own income), obtaining princely appointment became the major focus of a boyar's career. Such changes also implied the decline of free peasantry and the rise of serfdom, as well as the rapid fall in the importance of low boyars (a traditional institution, the latter soon became marginal, and, in more successful instances, added to the population of towns); however, they also implied a rapid transition towards a monetary economy, based on exchanges in foreign currency. Serfdom was doubled by the much less numerous slave population (robi), composed of migrant Roma and captured Nogais.


Moldavia through the ages
The conflict between princes and boyars was to become exceptionally violent – the latter group, who frequently appealed to the Ottoman court in order to have princes comply with its demands, was persecuted by rulers such as Alexandru Lapu?neanu and John III. Ioan Voda's revolt against the Ottomans ended in his execution (1574). The country descended into political chaos, with frequent Ottoman and Tatar incursions and pillages. The claims of Mu?atins to the crown and the traditional system of succession were ended by scores of illegitimate reigns; one of the usurpers, Ioan Iacob Heraclid, was a Protestant Greek who encouraged the Renaissance and attempted to introduce Lutheranism to Moldavia.

In 1595, the rise of the Movile?ti boyars to the throne with Ieremia Movila coincided with the start of frequent anti-Ottoman and anti-Habsburg military expeditions of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth into Moldavian territory (see Moldavian Magnate Wars), and rivalries between pretenders to the Moldavian throne encouraged by the three competing powers.

The Wallachian prince Michael the Brave, after previously taking over Transylvania, also deposed Prince Ieremia Movila, in 1600, and managed to become the first Prince to rule over Moldavia, Wallachia, and Transylvania;[13][14][15] the episode ended in Polish conquests of lands down to Bucharest, soon ended by the outbreak of the Polish–Swedish War and the reestablishment of Ottoman rule. Polish incursions were dealt a blow by the Ottomans during the 1620 Battle of Cecora, which also saw an end to the reign of Gaspar Graziani.

A period of relative peace followed during the more prosperous and prestigious rule of Vasile Lupu. He took the throne as a boyar appointee in 1637 and began battling his rival Gheorghe ?tefan, as well as the Wallachian prince Matei Basarab. However, his invasion of Wallachia, with the backing of Cossack Hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky, ended in disaster at the Battle of Finta in 1653. A few years later, Moldavia was occupied for two short intervals by the anti-Ottoman Wallachian prince Constantin ?erban, who clashed with the first ruler of the Ghica family, George Ghica. In the early 1680s, Moldavian troops under George Ducas intervened in right-bank Ukraine and assisted Mehmed IV in the Battle of Vienna, only to suffer the effects of the Great Turkish War.

Phanariots (1711–1822)[edit]
Main articles: Phanariotes and History of the Russo-Turkish wars

The Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia in 1782, Italian map by G. Pittori, since the geographer Giovanni Antonio Rizzi Zannoni.

Siege and capture of Jassy (Ia?i) in 1788 by the Russian army
During the late 17th century, Moldavia became the target of the Russian Empire's southwards expansion, inaugurated by Peter the Great with the Russo-Turkish War of 1710-1711. Prince Dimitrie Cantemir sided with Peter in open rebellion against the Ottomans, but he was defeated at Stanile?ti. Sultan Ahmed III officially discarded recognition of local choices for princes, imposing instead a system relying solely on Ottoman approval: the Phanariote epoch, inaugurated by the reign of Nicholas Mavrocordatos.

Phanariote rule was marked by political corruption, intrigue, and high taxation, as well as by sporadic incursions of Habsburg and Russian armies deep into Moldavian territory. Nonetheless, they also attempted legislative and administrative modernization inspired by The Enlightenment (such as the decision by Constantine Mavrocordatos to salarize public offices, to the outrage of boyars, and the abolition of serfdom in 1749, as well as Scarlat Callimachi's Code), and signified a decrease in Ottoman demands after the threat of Russian annexation became real and the prospects of a better life led to waves of peasant emigration to neighboring lands. The effects of Ottoman control were also made less notable after the 1774 Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca allowed Russia to intervene in favour of Ottoman subjects of the Eastern Orthodox faith - leading to campaigns of petitioning by the Moldavian boyars against princely policies.

In 1712, Hotin was taken over by the Ottomans and became part of a defensive system that Moldavian princes were required to maintain, as well as an area for Islamic colonization (the Laz community).

Fragmentation[edit]
See also: Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca and Treaty of Bucharest (1812)

Principality of Moldavia, 1793-1812, highlighted in orange
In 1775, Moldavia lost to the Habsburg Empire its northwestern part, which became known as Bukovina. For Moldavia, it meant both an important territorial loss and a major blow to the cattle trade (as the region stood on the trade route to Central Europe).

The 1792, Treaty of Jassy forced the Ottoman Empire to cede Yedisan to the Russian Empire, which made Russian presence much more notable, given that the Empire acquired a common border with Moldavia. The first effect of this was the cession of the eastern half of Moldavia (renamed as Bessarabia) to the Russian Empire, in 1812.

Organic Statute, 1848 revolution[edit]
Main articles: National awakening of Romania, Regulamentul Organic, Moldavian Revolution of 1848, and Wallachian Revolution of 1848

Ia?i, Princely Palace of Moldavia
Phanariote rules were officially ended after the 1821 occupation of the country by Alexander Ypsilantis's Filiki Eteria during the Greek War of Independence; the subsequent Ottoman retaliation brought the rule of Ioan Sturdza, considered as the first one of a new system – especially since, in 1826, the Ottomans and Russia agreed to allow for the election by locals of rulers over the two Danubian Principalities, and convened on their mandating for seven-year terms. In practice, a new fundament to reigns in Moldavia was created by the Russo-Turkish War (1828–1829), and a period of Russian domination over the two countries which ended only in 1856: begun as a military occupation under the command of Pavel Kiselyov, Russian domination gave Wallachia and Moldavia, which were not removed from nominal Ottoman control, the modernizing Organic Statute (the first document resembling a constitution, as well as the first one to regard both principalities). After 1829, the country also became an important destination for immigration of Ashkenazi Jews from the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria and areas of Russia (see History of the Jews in Romania and Sudi?i).


Ia?i, Obelisk of Lions (1834), dedicated to the Organic Statute
The first Moldavian rule established under the Statute, that of Mihail Sturdza, was nonetheless ambivalent: eager to reduce abuse of office, Sturdza introduced reforms (the abolition of slavery, secularization, economic rebuilding), but he was widely seen as enforcing his own power over that of the newly instituted consultative Assembly. A supporter of the union of his country with Wallachia and of Romanian Romantic nationalism, he obtained the establishment of a customs union between the two countries (1847) and showed support for radical projects favored by low boyars; nevertheless, he clamped down with noted violence the Moldavian revolutionary attempt in the last days of March 1848. Grigore Alexandru Ghica allowed the exiled revolutionaries to return to Moldavia c. 1853, which led to the creation of the National Party (Partida Na?ionala), a trans-boundary group of radical union supporters which campaigned for a single state under a foreign dynasty.

Southern Bessarabia[edit]

Moldavia (in orange) after 1856
In 1856, under the terms of the Treaty of Paris, the Russian Empire returned to Moldavia a significant territory in southern Bessarabia (including a part of Budjak), organised later as the Bolgrad, Cahul, and Ismail counties.[16]

Union with Wallachia[edit]
Russian domination ended abruptly after the Crimean War, when the Treaty of Paris also passed the two Romanian principalities under the tutelage of Great European Powers (together with Russia and the Ottoman overlord, power-sharing included the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, the Austrian Empire, the French Empire, the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia, and Prussia). Due to Austrian and Ottoman opposition and British reserves, the union program as demanded by radical campaigners was debated intensely. In September 1857, given that Caimacam Nicolae Vogoride had perpetrated fraud in elections in Moldavia, the Powers allowed the two states to convene ad-hoc divans, which were to decide a new constitutional framework; the result showed overwhelming support for the union, as the creation of a liberal and neutral state. After further meetings among leaders of tutor states, an agreement was reached (the Paris Convention), whereby a limited union was to be enforced – separate governments and thrones, with only two bodies (a Court of Cassation and a Central Commission residing in Foc?ani); it also stipulated that an end to all privilege was to be passed into law, and awarded back to Moldavia the areas around Bolhrad, Cahul, and Izmail.

However, the Convention failed to note whether the two thrones could not be occupied by the same person, allowing Partida Na?ionala to introduce the candidacy of Alexandru Ioan Cuza in both countries. On January 17 (January 5, 1859 Old Style), in Ia?i, he was elected prince of Moldavia by the respective electoral body. After street pressure over the much more conservative body in Bucharest, Cuza was elected in Wallachia as well (February 5/January 24). Exactly three years later, after diplomatic missions that helped remove opposition to the action, the formal union created the United Principalities (the basis of modern Romania) and instituted Cuza as Domnitor (all legal matters were clarified after the replacement of the prince with Carol of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen in April 1866, and the creation of an independent Kingdom of Romania in 1881) - this officially ending the existence of the Principality of Moldavia.

Society[edit]
Slavery[edit]
Slavery (Romanian: robie) was part of the social order from before the founding of the Principality of Moldavia, until it was abolished in stages during the 1840s and 1850s. Most of the slaves were of Roma (Gypsy) ethnicity. There were also slaves of Tatar ethnicity, probably prisoners captured from the wars with the Nogai and Crimean Tatars. The institution of slavery was first attested in a 1470 Moldavian document, through which Prince Stephen the Great frees Oana, a Tatar slave who had fled to Jagiellon Poland.[17]

The exact origins of slavery are not known, as it was a common practice in medieval Europe. As in the Byzantine Empire, the Roma were held as slaves of the state, of the boyars or of the monasteries. Historian Nicolae Iorga associated the Roma people's arrival with the 1241 Mongol invasion of Europe and considered their slavery as a vestige of that era; he believed that the Romanians took the Roma as slaves from the Mongols and preserved their status to control their labor. Other historians consider that the Roma were enslaved while captured during the battles with the Tatars. The practice of enslaving prisoners may also have been taken from the Mongols. The ethnic identity of the "Tatar slaves" is unknown, they could have been captured Tatars of the Golden Horde, Cumans, or the slaves of Tatars and Cumans.[17] While it is possible that some Romani people were slaves or auxiliary troops of the Mongols or Tatars, most of them came from south of the Danube, demonstrating that slavery a widespread practice. The Tatar slaves, smaller in numbers, were eventually merged into the Roma population.[18]

Traditionally, Roma slaves were divided into three categories. The smallest was owned by the hospodars, and went by the Romanian-language name of ?igani domne?ti ("Gypsies belonging to the lord"). The two other categories comprised ?igani manastire?ti ("Gypsies belonging to the monasteries"), who were the property of Romanian Orthodox and Greek Orthodox monasteries, and ?igani boiere?ti ("Gypsies belonging to the boyars"), who were enslaved by the category of landowners.[19][20]

The abolition of slavery was carried out following a campaign by young revolutionaries who embraced the liberal ideas of the Enlightenment. In 1844, Moldavian Prince Mihail Sturdza proposed a law on the freeing of slaves owned by the church and state. By the 1850s, the movement gained support from almost the whole of Romanian society. In December 1855, following a proposal by Prince Grigore Alexandru Ghica, a bill drafted by Mihail Kogalniceanu and Petre Mavrogheni was adopted by the Divan; the law emancipated all slaves to the status of taxpayers (citizens).[17][19]

Support for the abolitionists was reflected in Romanian literature of the mid-19th century. The issue of the Roma slavery became a theme in the literary works of various liberal and Romantic intellectuals, many of whom were active in the abolitionist camp. The Romanian abolitionist movement was also influenced by the much larger movement against Black slavery in the United States through press reports and through a translation of Harriet Beecher Stowe's Uncle Tom's Cabin. Translated by Theodor Codrescu and first published in Ia?i in 1853, under the name Coliba lui Mo?u Toma sau Via?a negrilor în sudul Statelor Unite din America (which translates back as "Uncle Toma's Cabin or the Life of Blacks in the Southern United States of America"), it was the first American novel to be published in Romanian. The foreword included a study on slavery by Mihail Kogalniceanu.[17]

Military forces[edit]
Main article: Moldavian military forces

Moldavian troops in battle, as illustrated in Johannes de Thurocz (1488 edition); the Moldavian flag is displayed
Under the reign of Stephen the Great, all farmers and villagers had to bear arms. Stephen justified this by saying that "every man has a duty to defend his fatherland"; according to Polish chronicler Jan Dlugosz, if someone was found without carrying a weapon, he was sentenced to death.[21] Stephen reformed the army by promoting men from the landed free peasantry raze?i (i.e. something akin to freeholding yeomen) to infantry (voinici) and light cavalry (hânsari) — to make himself less dependent on the boyars — and introduced his army to guns. In times of crises, The Small Host (Oastea Mica) — which consisted of around 10,000 to 12,000 men — stood ready to engage the enemy, while the Large Host (Oastea Mare) — which could reach up to 40,000 — had all the free peasantry older than 14, and strong enough to carry a sword or use the bow, recruited. This seldom happened, for such a levée en masse was devastating for both economy and population growth. In the Battle of Vaslui, Stephen had to summon the Large Host and also recruited mercenary troops.


Battle flag of Stephen the Great
In the Middle Ages and early Renaissance, the Moldavians relied on light cavalry (calara?i) which used hit-and-run tactics similar to those of the Tatars; this gave them great mobility and also flexibility, in case they found it more suitable to dismount their horses and fight in hand-to-hand combat, as it happened in 1422, when 400 horse archers were sent to aid Jagiellon Poland, Moldavia’s overlord against the Teutonic Knights. When making eye-contact with the enemy, the horse archers would withdraw to a nearby forest and camouflage themselves with leaves and branches; according to Jan Dlugosz, when the enemy entered the wood, they were "showered with arrows" and defeated.[22] The heavy cavalry consisted of the nobility, namely, the boyars and their guards, the viteji (lit. "brave ones", small nobility) and the curteni — the Court Cavalry (all nominally part of the Small Host). In times of war, boyars were compelled by the feudal system of allegiance to supply the prince with troops in accordance with the extent of their manorial domain.

Other troops consisted of professional foot soldiers (lefegii) which fulfilled the heavy infantry role, and the plaie?i, free peasants whose role was that of border guards: they guarded the mountain passes and were prepared to ambush the enemy and to fight delaying actions.

In the absence of the prince, command was assigned to the Mare Spatar (Grand Sword-Bearer - a military office) or to the Mare Vornic (approx. Governor of the Country; a civilian office second only to the Voievod, which was filled by the prince himself). Supplying the troops was by tradition-later-made-into-law the duty of the inhabitants of those lands on which the soldiers were present at a given time.

The Moldavians' (as well as Wallachians') favourite military doctrine in (defensive) wars was a scorched earth policy combined with harassment of the advancing enemy using hit-and-run tactics and disruption of communication and supply lines, followed by a large scale ambush: a weakened enemy would be lured in a place where it would find itself in a position hard or impossible to defend. A general attack would follow, often with devastating results. The shattered remains of what was once the enemy army would be pursued closely and harassed all the way to the border and sometimes beyond. A typical example of successful employments of this scenario is the Battle of Vaslui.

Towards the end of the 15th century, especially after the success of guns and cannons, mercenaries became a dominant force in the country’s military. With the economic demands created by the stagnation of the Ottoman Empire, the force diminished and included only mercenaries such as the seimeni.

The 1829 Treaty of Adrianople allowed Moldavia to again maintain its own troops, no longer acting as an auxiliary under strict Ottoman supervision, and assigned red over blue pennants (see Flag and coat of arms of Moldavia). Their renewed existence under Mihail Sturdza was a major symbol and rally point for the nationalist cause, aiding in bringing about the 1848 Moldavian revolution.

Fleet[edit]

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
An early mention of a Moldavian naval fleet is found in connection with the rule of Aron Tiranul, who used it to help Wallachian ruler Michael the Brave establish his control over the Chilia branch of the Danube and Dobruja.

The Treaty of Adrianople provided for a Moldavian self-defense naval force, to be composed of caicque vessels. Schooners armed with cannons were first built in the 1840s. Along with patrolling the Danube, these made their way on its tributaries, the Siret and the Prut River.

Flags and historical coats of arms[edit]
Further information: Flag and coat of arms of Moldavia

14th century coat of arms of Baia, the first capital of Moldavia

 

Outline of an image on stove remains excavated at the Neam? Citadel, showing the Wisent/Aurochs coat of arms of Moldavia

 

Coat of arms of Stephen III of Moldavia

 

Coat of arms of the principality of Moldavia, at the Ceta?uia Monastery in Ia?i

 

Seal of Michael the Brave (showing the arms of Wallachia, Moldavia and Transylvania)

 

Historical coat of arms of the Duchy of Bukovina

 

Coat of arms of the Duchy of Bukovina on display at the Palace of Justice in Vienna, Austria

 

Moruzi family coat of arms

 

Rosetti family coat of arms

 

Sturdza family coat of arms

 

Bull's Head stamp, 1858

 

Medieval flag of Moldavia held by two Romanian soldiers at Sorbonne, Paris, France

 

Flag of the Moldavian Democratic Republic (1917-18)

Geography[edit]
See also: Moldavian Plateau

Physical map of Moldavia
Geographically, Moldavia is limited by the Carpathian Mountains to the West, the Cheremosh River to the North, the Dniester River to the East and the Danube and Black Sea to the South. The Prut River flows approximately through its middle from north to south.

Of late 15th century Moldavia, with an area of approximately 97,000 km2 (37,000 sq mi), the biggest part and the core of the former principality is located in Romania (47.5%), followed by the Republic of Moldova (30.5%) and Ukraine (22%). This represents 88% of the Republic of Moldova's surface, 19.5% of Romania's surface, and 3.5% of Ukraine's surface.

The region is mostly hilly, with a range of mountains in the west, and plain areas in the southeast. Moldavia's highest altitude is Ineu peak (2,279 m), which is also the westernmost point of the region.

Administrative divisions[edit]
Main article: Administrative divisions of Moldavia
Population[edit]
Historical population[edit]
See also: Demographic history of Romania, Bessarabia § Population, Bukovina § Historical population, Chernivtsi Oblast § Population and demographics, and Budjak § Ethnic groups and demographics
Contemporary historians estimate the population (historically referred to as Moldavians) of the Moldavian Principality in the 15th century, at between 250,000 - 600,000 people,[23][24] but an extensive catagraphy was first conducted in 1769-1774.[25]

In 1848, the northwestern part, annexed in 1775 by the Habsburg Empire, Bukovina, had a population of 377,571; in 1856, the eastern half of Moldavia, Bessarabia, annexed in 1812 by the Russian Empire, had a population of 990,274, while the population of Moldavia proper (the western half), in 1859, was 1,463,927.[26]

Cities[edit]
The largest cities (as per last censuses) and metropolitan areas in the Moldavia region are:

Moldova:
Chi?inau - 532,513 (662,836 in metropolitan area)
Bal?i - 97,930 (102,457)
Tighina (Bender) - 91,882
Romania:
Ia?i - 290,422 (465,477 in metropolitan area) - capital of Moldavia between 1564–1859
Gala?i - 249,432 (323,563)
Bacau - 144,307 (223,239)
Boto?ani - 106,847 (144,617)
Suceava - 92,121 (144,100) - capital of Moldavia between 1388–1564
Piatra Neam? - 85,055 (131,334)
Foc?ani - 79,315 (125,699)
Ukraine:
Chernivtsi (Cernau?i) - 240,600
Izmail (Ismail) - 84,815
Education[edit]

Academia Mihaileana was the first modern institution of higher learning in Moldavia
In 1562, the so-called Schola Latina (a Latin Academic College) was founded in Cotnari, near Ia?i, a school which marked the beginnings of the organized humanistic education institutions in Moldavia.[27]

The first institute of higher learning that functioned on the territory of Romania was Academia Vasiliana (1640),[28] founded by Prince Vasile Lupu as a Higher School for Latin and Slavonic Languages, followed by the Princely Academy, in 1707. The first high education structure in Romanian language was established in the autumn of 1813, when Gheorghe Asachi laid the foundations of a class of engineers, its activities taking place within the Greek Princely Academy.

After 1813, other moments marked the development of higher education in Romanian language, regarding both humanities and the technical science. Academia Mihaileana, founded in 1835 by Prince Mihail Sturdza, is considered the first Romanian superior institute. In 1860, three faculties part of the Academia Mihaileana formed the nucleus for the newly established University of Ia?i, the first Romanian modern university.[29]

Culture[edit]

Great Theatre of Moldavia, Ia?i, 1846

Albina Româneasca (The Romanian Bee) was, in 1829, the first Romanian-language journal published in Moldavia
Literature[edit]
Cazania lui Varlaam
Descriptio Moldaviae
Chronicle of Huru
Grigore Ureche
Miron Costin
Nicolae Costin
Ion Neculce
Dimitrie Cantemir
Gheorghe Asachi
Magazines and newspapers[edit]
Alauta Româneasca
Albina Româneasca
Dacia Literara
Propa?irea
România literara
Theatre[edit]
The Great Theatre/National Theatre
Architecture[edit]
Moldavian style
World Heritage Sites:
Churches of Moldavia
Residence of Bukovinian and Dalmatian Metropolitans
Rudi Geodetic Point (as part of the Struve Geodetic Arc)
Tentative list:
Neam? Monastery
Trei Ierarhi Monastery
The Cultural Landscape Orheiul Vechi (Old Orhei)
The Typical Crernozem Soils of the Balti Steppe
Slatioara Secular Forest
Image gallery[edit]

Panoramic view of Suceava Seat Fortress

 

Panoramic view of Neam? citadel

 

Eastern side of Neam? citadel

 

Cetatea Alba Fortress, at the confluence of Dniester and the Black Sea

 

Putna Monastery (1466)

 

Vorone? Monastery (1488). Frescoes painted on the exterior of the Church of St. George

 

Bogdana Monastery in Radau?i, the oldest stone monastery in Moldavia

 

Holy Trinity Church (1352) in Siret

 

Neam? Monastery (1497)

 

Capriana Monastery (1429)

 

Ia?i (Jassy), 1701

 

Prince Alexandru Ioan Cuza's Palace at Ruginoasa

 

Sturdza Castle at Miclau?eni

 

Port of Gala?i on Danube, early 19th century

 

Moldavian peasants (1838)

 

A soirée at the princely court, Ia?i 1840

 

Homestead from Dumbraveni, at the National Village Museum

 

Wisents in Vânatori-Neam? Natural Park

 

Ceahlau Massif in the western part

 

Historical and archaeological complex Old Orhei

 

Nistru (Dniester) River, the eastern limit of Moldavia

See also[edit]
Bessarabia
Bukovina
Budjak
Hertza region
Moldavia (region of Romania)
History of Moldova
History of Romania
List of rulers of Moldavia
Moldavian military forces
Bogdan Saray
References[edit]
Jump up ^ ?tefan Pascu, Documente straine despre români, ed. Arhivelor statului, Bucure?ti 1992, ISBN 973-95711-2-3
Jump up ^ "Tout ce pays: la Wallachie, la Moldavie et la plus part de la Transylvanie, a esté peuplé des colonies romaines du temps de Trajan l’empereur… Ceux du pays se disent vrais successeurs des Romains et nomment leur parler romanechte, c'est-à-dire romain … " în Voyage fait par moy, Pierre Lescalopier l’an 1574 de Venise a Constantinople, în: Paul Cernovodeanu, Studii ?i materiale de istorie medievala, IV, 1960, p. 444
Jump up ^ Dimitrie Cantemir Descriptio Moldaviae
Jump up ^ Pierre Lescalopier l’an 1574 de Venise a Constantinople, dans Paul Cernovodeanu, Studii ?i materiale de istorie medievala, IV, 1960, p. 444
Jump up ^ Paul Cernovodeanu, Studii ?i materiale de istorie medievala, IV, 1960, p. 444.
Jump up ^ Where did the name Moldova come from? Archived 2010-01-27 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Etymology of Moldova
Jump up ^ Ion Ciortan, Mariuca Radu, Octavian Ion Penda, Descriptio Romaniae (cartographie), National Museum of Maps & old books, Autonomous regie Monitorul oficial, Bucharest 2004
Jump up ^ Octavian-Liviu ?ovan, Zorile cre?tinismului în nord-estul Moldovei-repere arheologice, Revista Forum cultural, Anul V, nr.4, decembrie 2005 (19)
Jump up ^ A.V. Boldur, Istoria Basarabiei, Editura V. Frunza, p 111-119
Jump up ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2006-06-16. Retrieved 2006-06-16.
Jump up ^ The Annals of Jan Dlugosz, p. 273
Jump up ^ Michael the Brave at Encyclopædia Britannica
Jump up ^ George W. White (2000). Nationalism and Territory: Constructing Group Identity in Southeastern Europe. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-8476-9809-7.
Jump up ^ A document issued by Michael the Brave in 1600, in Ia?i
Jump up ^ King, p.22-23; Hitchins, p. 41
^ Jump up to: a b c d Viorel Achim, The Roma in Romanian History, Central European University Press, Budapest, 2004, ISBN 963-9241-84-9
Jump up ^ ?tefan ?tefanescu, Istoria medie a României, Vol. I, Editura Universita?ii din Bucure?ti, Bucharest, 1991 (in Romanian)
^ Jump up to: a b Neagu Djuvara, Între Orient ?i Occident. ?arile române la începutul epocii moderne, Humanitas, Bucharest, 1995. ISBN 973-28-0523-4 (in Romanian)
Jump up ^ Will Guy, Between Past and Future: The Roma of Central and Eastern Europe, University of Hertfordshire Press, Hatfield, 2001. ISBN 1-902806-07-7
Jump up ^ The Annals of Jan Dlugosz, p. 566
Jump up ^ Dlugosz, p. 438
Jump up ^ East Central Europe in the Middle Ages, 1000-1500, Jean W. Sedlar, page 255, 1994
Jump up ^ Cavalerii Apocalipsului: Calamitatile Naturale Din Trecutul Romaniei (Pana La 1800), Paul Cernovodeanu, Paul Binder, 1993, ISBN 973-95477-3-7, Romanian Edition
Jump up ^ First activities of population counting conducted on the Romanian territory of today
Jump up ^ Moldavians at the 2002 census (in Romanian)
Jump up ^ Schola Latina - The Foundation of the first School in which mathematics was taught in Roumania
Jump up ^ History of Education
Jump up ^ History of the Alexandru Ioan Cuza University of Ia?i
Gheorghe I. Bratianu, Sfatul domnesc ?i Adunarea Starilor în Principatele Române, Bucharest, 1995
Vlad Georgescu, Istoria ideilor politice române?ti (1369-1878), Munich, 1987
?tefan ?tefanescu, Istoria medie a României, Bucharest, 1991
External links[edit]
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Moldavia.
Dimitrie Cantemir-Descrierea Moldovei
The Princely Court in Bacau[permanent dead link] - images, layouts (at the Romanian Group for an Alternative History Website)
Original Documents concerning both Moldavia and other Romania Principalities during the Middle Ages (at the Romanian Group for an Alternative History Website)
Pilgrimage and Cultural Heritage Tourism in Moldavia
Painted Churches in Bukovina
Medieval Coins of Moldavia and Wallachia (in Romanian) (in English)
[show] v t e
Historical regions in Romania
[show] v t e
Osmanli-nisani.svg Administrative divisions of the Ottoman Empire
[show] v t e
Fiefs of the Polish Kingdom
Authority control	
GND: 4039965-5
Categories: Former principalitiesFormer countries in EuropeStates and territories established in 1346States and territories disestablished in 1859MoldaviaHistory of MoldaviaHistorical regions in MoldovaHistorical regions in RomaniaHistorical regions in UkraineVassal and tributary states of the Ottoman EmpireOttoman period in Moldova1859 disestablishmentsDivided regions
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Languages
??????
??????????
?????????? (???????????)?
?????????
Català
Ceština
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Español
Esperanto
?????
Français
Galego
???
???????
Íslenska
?????
???????
???
Latina
Lietuviu
??????????
Nederlands
Norsk nynorsk
Polski
Português
Româna
???????
Scots
Slovencina
?????????? / ??????????
?????? / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / ??????????????
???
Türkçe
??????????
Ti?ng Vi?t
??
Edit links
This page was last edited on 1 January 2018, at 06:34.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
 ^ Herman, Robin (28 March 1976). "Gymnast Posts Perfect Mark". New York Times. Archived from the original on 22 November 2008. Retrieved 13 August 2008.
Sources
Primary sources
The Ancient History of Herodotus (Translated by William Beloe) (1859). Derby & Jackson.
Eutropius, Abridgment of Roman History (Translated by John Selby Watson) (1886). George Bell and Sons.
Secondary sources
Hitchins, Keith (2014). A Concise History of Romania. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-87238-6.
Pohl, Walter (2013). "National origin narratives in the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy". In Geary, Patrick J.; Klaniczay, Gábor. Manufacturing Middle Ages: Entangled History of Medievalism in Nineteenth-Century Europe. BRILL. pp. 13–50. ISBN 978-90-04-24487-0.
External links
Find more about
Romania
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity
Country Profile from BBC News.
Romania Article and Country Profile from Encyclopædia Britannica
Romania Profile from Balkan Insight.
"Romania". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
Romania information from the United States Department of State.
Portals to the World from the United States Library of Congress.
Romania at UCB Libraries GovPubs.
Romania at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
 Wikimedia Atlas of Romania
 Geographic data related to Romania at OpenStreetMap
Key Development Forecasts for Romania from International Futures.
Romanian Law and Miscellaneous – English
Government
Romanian Presidency
Romanian Parliament
Culture and history links
Treasures of the national library of Romania
Historic Houses of Romania


[hide] v t e
Romania articles
Topics
History	
Timeline Prehistoric Romania Dacia Roman Dacia Early Middle Ages Middle Ages Early Modern Era National awakening United Principalities Kingdom World War I Greater Romania World War II Communist Romania Revolution Since 1989
Geography	
Cities Climate Counties Earthquakes Fauna Flora Islands Lakes Mountains Protected areas Rivers Topography
Politics	
Administrative divisions Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT LGBT history Judiciary Law enforcement Military Parliament Political parties Unification with Moldova
Economy	
Agriculture Energy Exports Foreign investment Foreign trade Industry automotive construction mining petrochemical Leu (currency) National Bank Property bubble Science and technology Services Stock Exchange Telecommunications Tourism Transport
Society	
Crime Demographics Education Healthcare Immigration Languages Minorities Hungarians in Romania Public holidays Religion Romanians Social structure Urban planning Welfare
Culture	
Academy Architecture Art Cinema Cuisine Folklore Humour Literature Media Music Philosophy Sport
Outline Index
Book Category Portal Commons page Commons
[show] v t e
Sovereign states and dependencies of Europe
Terra.pngGeography portal Europe green light.pngEurope portal Flag of Europe.svgEuropean Union portal Flag of NATO.svgNATO portal
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 124251001 LCCN: n79049551 GND: 4050939-4 SUDOC: 026400030 BNF: cb11865467h (data) HDS: 3369 NDL: 00569801
Categories: Romania1859 establishments in EuropeBalkan countriesLiberal democraciesMember states of NATOMember states of the Council of EuropeMember states of the European UnionMember states of the Union for the MediterraneanMember states of the United NationsRepublicsRomance countries and territoriesRomanian-speaking countries and territoriesStates and territories established in 1859
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikinews
Wikiquote
Wikivoyage
Languages
Acèh
????????
????????
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
????
Ænglisc
???????
Aragonés
?????
Armãneashti
Arpetan
Asturianu
Avañe'?
????
Aymar aru
Az?rbaycanca
??????
?????
Bân-lâm-gú
?????????
??????????
?????????? (???????????)?
???????
Bikol Central
Bislama
?????????
Boarisch
???????
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
??????
Català
???????
Cebuano
Ceština
Chavacano de Zamboanga
ChiShona
ChiTumbuka
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Davvisámegiella
Deitsch
Deutsch
??????????
Dolnoserbski
Eesti
????????
Emiliàn e rumagnòl
??????
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
E?egbe
?????
Fiji Hindi
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Fulfulde
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gagauz
Gàidhlig
Galego
???????
?????? ?????? / Gõychi Konknni
???/Hak-kâ-ngî
??????
???
Hausa
Hawai?i
???????
??????
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Igbo
Ilokano
????????????? ???????
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
????
Íslenska
Italiano
?????
Basa Jawa
Kalaallisut
?????
Kapampangan
????????-???????
???????
Kaszëbsczi
???????
Kernowek
Kinyarwanda
Kiswahili
????
Kongo
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî
????????
Ladino
?????
?????
???
Latgalu
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuviu
Ligure
Limburgs
Lingála
Livvinkarjala
La .lojban.
Lumbaart
Magyar
??????????
Malagasy
??????
Malti
Maori
?????
?????????
????
????????
Bahasa Melayu
Mìng-de?ng-ng?¯
Mirandés
???????
????????????
??????
??????????
Nahuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
Nedersaksies
??????
????? ????
???
Napulitano
???????
Nordfriisk
Norfuk / Pitkern
Norsk
Norsk nynorsk
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
???? ?????
?????
Oromoo
O?zbekcha/???????
??????
????
Pangasinan
??????
Papiamentu
????
Patois
????? ????
Picard
Piemontèis
Tok Pisin
Plattdüütsch
Polski
???t?a??
Português
Qaraqalpaqsha
Qirimtatarca
Româna
Romani
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
??????????
???????
???? ????
Gagana Samoa
Sardu
Scots
Seeltersk
Sesotho
Shqip
Sicilianu
?????
Simple English
SiSwati
Slovencina
Slovenšcina
?????????? / ??????????
Slunski
Soomaaliga
?????
Sranantongo
?????? / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / ??????????????
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
?????
Taqbaylit
Tarandíne
???????/tatarça
??????
Tetun
???
????
??????
???
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Twi
??????
??????????
????
???????? / Uyghurche
Vèneto
Vepsän kel’
Ti?ng Vi?t
Volapük
Võro
Walon
??
West-Vlams
Winaray
Wolof
??
??????
Yorùbá
??
Zazaki
Zeêuws
Žemaiteška
??
??????
Kab?y?
Edit links
This page was last edited on 7 January 2018, at 12:10.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

??
Zazaki
Zeêuws
Žemaiteška
??
??????
Kab?y?
Edit links
This page was last edited on 7 January 2018, at 12:10.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki




 Page semi-protected
Russia
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Russian Federation" redirects here. For other uses of "Russia", see Russia (disambiguation).
Coordinates: 60°N 90°E

Russian Federation
?????????? ????????? (Russian)
Rossiyskaya Federatsiya
Flag of Russia
Flag
Coat of arms of Russia
Coat of arms
Anthem: 
"Gosudarstvenny gimn Rossiyskoy Federatsii"  (transliteration)
"State Anthem of the Russian Federation"
MENU0:00
Location of Russia (green)Russian-administered Crimea (disputed; light green)a
Location of Russia (green)
Russian-administered Crimea (disputed; light green)a
Capital
and largest city	Moscow
55°45'N 37°37'E
Official languages	Russian
Recognised national languages	See Languages of Russia
Ethnic groups (2010[1])	
81.0% Russian
3.7% Tatar
1.4% Ukrainian
1.1% Bashkir
1.0% Chuvash
0.8% Chechen
11.0% others / unspecified
Religion	See Religion in Russia
Demonym	Russian
Government	Federal semi-presidential constitutional republic[2]
• President
Vladimir Putin
• Chairman of the Government
Dmitry Medvedev
• Chairman of the Federation Council
Valentina Matviyenko
• Chairman of the State Duma
Vyacheslav Volodin
Legislature	Federal Assembly
• Upper house
Council of the Federation
• Lower house
State Duma
Formation
• Arrival of Rurik[3]
862
• Kievan Rus'
882
• Grand Duchy of Moscow
1283
• Tsardom
January 16, 1547
• Empire
October 22, 1721
• Republic
September 14, 1917
• Russian SFSR
November 7 (October 25, OS), 1917
• Soviet Union
December 30, 1922
• Sovereignty Declaration
June 12, 1990
• CIS Declaration
December 8, 1991b
• Russian SFSR renamed into the Russian Federation
December 25, 1991b
• Current constitution
December 12, 1993
Area
• Total
17,075,200[4] km2 (6,592,800 sq mi) (1st)
• Water (%)
13[5] (including swamps)
Population
• 2017 estimate
144,463,451 Increase[6] (without Crimea)[7] (9th)
• Density
8.4/km2 (21.8/sq mi) (217th)
GDP (PPP)	2017 estimate
• Total
$4.000 trillion[8] (6th)
• Per capita
$27,900[8] (52nd)
GDP (nominal)	2017 estimate
• Total
$1.469 trillion[8] (11th)
• Per capita
$10,248[8] (72nd)
Gini (2015)	Positive decrease 37.7[9]
medium · 98
HDI (2015)	Increase 0.804[10]
very high · 49th
Currency	Russian ruble (?) (RUB)
Time zone	(UTC+2 to +12)
Date format	dd.mm.yyyy
Drives on the	right
Calling code	+7
ISO 3166 code	RU
Internet TLD	
.ru
.su
.??
The Crimean Peninsula is recognized as territory of Ukraine by a majority of UN member nations, but is de facto administered by Russia.[11]
The Belavezha Accords was signed in Brest, Belarus on December 8, creating the Commonwealth of Independent States in which the Supreme Soviet of the Russian SFSR ratified the accords on December 12, denouncing the 1922 treaty. On December 25, Russian SFSR was renamed the Russian Federation and the following the day on December 26, the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union ratified the accords, effectively dissolving the Soviet Union.
Russia (/'r???/ (About this sound listen); Russian: ?????´?, tr. Rossíya, IPA: [r?'s?ij?]) officially the Russian Federation[12] (Russian: ?????????? ?????????, tr. Rossiyskaya Federatsiya, IPA: [r?'s?ijsk?j? f??d??'rats?j?]), is a sovereign country in Eurasia.[13] At 17,125,200 square kilometres (6,612,100 sq mi),[14] Russia is the largest country in the world by area, covering more than one-eighth of the Earth's inhabited land area,[15][16][17] and the ninth most populous, with over 144 million people at the end of March 2016.[18][7] The European western part of the country is much more populated and urbanised than the eastern; about 77% of the population live in European Russia. Russia's capital Moscow is one of the largest cities in the world; other major urban centers include Saint Petersburg, Novosibirsk, Yekaterinburg, Chelyabinsk, Nizhny Novgorod, Ufa, and Kazan.

Extending across the entirety of Northern Asia and much of Eastern Europe, Russia spans eleven time zones and incorporates a wide range of environments and landforms. From northwest to southeast, Russia shares land borders with Norway, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland (both with Kaliningrad Oblast), Belarus, Ukraine, Georgia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, China, Mongolia and North Korea. It shares maritime borders with Japan by the Sea of Okhotsk and the U.S. state of Alaska across the Bering Strait.

The East Slavs emerged as a recognizable group in Europe between the 3rd and 8th centuries AD.[19] Founded and ruled by a Varangian warrior elite and their descendants, the medieval state of Rus arose in the 9th century. In 988 it adopted Orthodox Christianity from the Byzantine Empire,[20] beginning the synthesis of Byzantine and Slavic cultures that defined Russian culture for the next millennium.[20] Rus' ultimately disintegrated into a number of smaller states; most of the Rus' lands were overrun by the Mongol invasion and became tributaries of the nomadic Golden Horde in the 13th century.[21] The Grand Duchy of Moscow gradually reunified the surrounding Russian principalities, achieved independence from the Golden Horde, and came to dominate the cultural and political legacy of Kievan Rus'. By the 18th century, the nation had greatly expanded through conquest, annexation, and exploration to become the Russian Empire, which was the third largest empire in history, stretching from Poland on the west to Alaska on the east.[22][23]

Following the Russian Revolution, the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic became the largest and leading constituent of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the world's first constitutionally socialist state.[24] The Soviet Union played a decisive role in the Allied victory in World War II,[25][26] and emerged as a recognized superpower and rival to the United States during the Cold War. The Soviet era saw some of the most significant technological achievements of the 20th century, including the world's first human-made satellite and the launching of the first humans in space. By the end of 1990, the Soviet Union had the world's second largest economy, largest standing military in the world and the largest stockpile of weapons of mass destruction.[27][28][29] Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, twelve independent republics emerged from the USSR: Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and the Baltic states regained independence: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania; the Russian SFSR reconstituted itself as the Russian Federation and is recognized as the continuing legal personality and sole successor state of the Soviet Union.[30] It is governed as a federal semi-presidential republic.

The Russian economy ranks as the twelfth largest by nominal GDP and sixth largest by purchasing power parity in 2015.[31] Russia's extensive mineral and energy resources are the largest such reserves in the world,[32] making it one of the leading producers of oil and natural gas globally.[33][34] The country is one of the five recognized nuclear weapons states and possesses the largest stockpile of weapons of mass destruction.[35] Russia is a great power as well as a regional power and has been characterised as a potential superpower. It is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, as well as a member of the G20, the Council of Europe, the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO), the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), and the World Trade Organization (WTO), as well as being the leading member of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) and one of the five members of the Eurasian Economic Union (EEU), along with Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan.

Contents  [hide] 
1	Etymology
2	History
2.1	Early history
2.2	Kievan Rus'
2.3	Grand Duchy of Moscow
2.4	Tsardom of Russia
2.5	Imperial Russia
2.6	February Revolution and Russian Republic
2.7	Soviet Russia and civil war
2.8	Soviet Union
2.9	Russian Federation
3	Politics
3.1	Governance
3.2	Foreign relations
3.3	Military
3.4	Political divisions
4	Geography
4.1	Topography
4.2	Climate
4.3	Biodiversity
5	Economy
5.1	Agriculture
5.2	Energy
5.3	Transport
5.4	Science and technology
5.5	Space exploration
5.6	Water supply and sanitation
6	Demographics
6.1	Largest cities
6.2	Ethnic groups
6.3	Language
6.4	Religion
6.5	Health
6.6	Education
7	Culture
7.1	Folk culture and cuisine
7.2	Architecture
7.3	Visual arts
7.4	Music and dance
7.5	Literature and philosophy
7.6	Cinema, animation and media
7.7	Sports
7.8	National holidays and symbols
7.9	Tourism
8	See also
9	References
10	External links
Etymology
Main articles: Rus' people and Rus' (name)
See also: Russian (disambiguation)
The name Russia is derived from Rus', a medieval state populated mostly by the East Slavs. However, this proper name became more prominent in the later history, and the country typically was called by its inhabitants "??????? ?????" (russkaja zemlja), which can be translated as "Russian Land" or "Land of Rus'". In order to distinguish this state from other states derived from it, it is denoted as Kievan Rus' by modern historiography. The name Rus itself comes from the early medieval Rus' people, Swedish merchants and warriors[36][37] who relocated from across the Baltic Sea and founded a state centered on Novgorod that later became Kievan Rus.

An old Latin version of the name Rus' was Ruthenia, mostly applied to the western and southern regions of Rus' that were adjacent to Catholic Europe. The current name of the country, ?????? (Rossija), comes from the Byzantine Greek designation of the Rus', ??ss?a Rossía—spelled ??s?a (Rosía pronounced [ro'sia]) in Modern Greek.[38]

The standard way to refer to citizens of Russia is "Russians" in English[39] and rossiyane (Russian: ????????) in Russian. There are two Russian words which are commonly translated into English as "Russians". One is "???????" (russkiye), which most often means "ethnic Russians". Another is "????????" (rossiyane), which means "citizens of Russia, regardless of ethnicity". Translations into other languages often do not distinguish these two groups.

History
Main article: History of Russia
Early history
Further information: Scythia, Early Slavs, East Slavs, Huns, Turkic expansion, and Prehistory of Siberia
Further information: Proto-Indo-European and Proto-Uralic
Nomadic pastoralism developed in the Pontic-Caspian steppe beginning in the Chalcolithic.[40]

In classical antiquity, the Pontic Steppe was known as Scythia. Beginning in the 8th century BC, Ancient Greek traders brought their civilization to the trade emporiums in Tanais and Phanagoria. Ancient Greek explorers, most notably Pytheas, even went as far as modern day Kaliningrad, on the Baltic Sea. Romans settled on the western part of the Caspian Sea, where their empire stretched towards the east.[dubious – discuss][41] In the 3rd to 4th centuries AD a semi-legendary Gothic kingdom of Oium existed in Southern Russia until it was overrun by Huns. Between the 3rd and 6th centuries AD, the Bosporan Kingdom, a Hellenistic polity which succeeded the Greek colonies,[42] was also overwhelmed by nomadic invasions led by warlike tribes, such as the Huns and Eurasian Avars.[43] A Turkic people, the Khazars, ruled the lower Volga basin steppes between the Caspian and Black Seas until the 10th century.[44]

The ancestors of modern Russians are the Slavic tribes, whose original home is thought by some scholars to have been the wooded areas of the Pinsk Marshes.[45] The East Slavs gradually settled Western Russia in two waves: one moving from Kiev toward present-day Suzdal and Murom and another from Polotsk toward Novgorod and Rostov. From the 7th century onwards, the East Slavs constituted the bulk of the population in Western Russia[46] and assimilated the native Finno-Ugric peoples, including the Merya, the Muromians, and the Meshchera.

Kievan Rus'
Main articles: Rus' Khaganate, Kievan Rus', and List of early East Slavic states

Kievan Rus' in the 11th century
The establishment of the first East Slavic states in the 9th century coincided with the arrival of Varangians, the traders, warriors and settlers from the Baltic Sea region. Primarily they were Vikings of Scandinavian origin, who ventured along the waterways extending from the eastern Baltic to the Black and Caspian Seas.[47] According to the Primary Chronicle, a Varangian from Rus' people, named Rurik, was elected ruler of Novgorod in 862. In 882 his successor Oleg ventured south and conquered Kiev,[48] which had been previously paying tribute to the Khazars, founding Kievan Rus'. Oleg, Rurik's son Igor and Igor's son Sviatoslav subsequently subdued all local East Slavic tribes to Kievan rule, destroyed the Khazar khaganate and launched several military expeditions to Byzantium and Persia.

In the 10th to 11th centuries Kievan Rus' became one of the largest and most prosperous states in Europe.[49] The reigns of Vladimir the Great (980–1015) and his son Yaroslav the Wise (1019–1054) constitute the Golden Age of Kiev, which saw the acceptance of Orthodox Christianity from Byzantium and the creation of the first East Slavic written legal code, the Russkaya Pravda.

In the 11th and 12th centuries, constant incursions by nomadic Turkic tribes, such as the Kipchaks and the Pechenegs, caused a massive migration of Slavic populations to the safer, heavily forested regions of the north, particularly to the area known as Zalesye.[50]


The Baptism of Kievans, by Klavdy Lebedev
The age of feudalism and decentralization was marked by constant in-fighting between members of the Rurik Dynasty that ruled Kievan Rus' collectively. Kiev's dominance waned, to the benefit of Vladimir-Suzdal in the north-east, Novgorod Republic in the north-west and Galicia-Volhynia in the south-west.

Ultimately Kievan Rus' disintegrated, with the final blow being the Mongol invasion of 1237–40[51] that resulted in the destruction of Kiev[52] and the death of about half the population of Rus'.[53] The invading Mongol elite, together with their conquered Turkic subjects (Cumans, Kipchaks, Bulgars), became known as Tatars, forming the state of the Golden Horde, which pillaged the Russian principalities; the Mongols ruled the Cuman-Kipchak confederation and Volga Bulgaria (modern-day southern and central expanses of Russia) for over two centuries.[54]

Galicia-Volhynia was eventually assimilated by the Kingdom of Poland, while the Mongol-dominated Vladimir-Suzdal and Novgorod Republic, two regions on the periphery of Kiev, established the basis for the modern Russian nation.[20] The Novgorod together with Pskov retained some degree of autonomy during the time of the Mongol yoke and were largely spared the atrocities that affected the rest of the country. Led by Prince Alexander Nevsky, Novgorodians repelled the invading Swedes in the Battle of the Neva in 1240, as well as the Germanic crusaders in the Battle of the Ice in 1242, breaking their attempts to colonize the Northern Rus'.

Grand Duchy of Moscow
Main article: Grand Duchy of Moscow

Sergius of Radonezh blessing Dmitry Donskoy in Trinity Sergius Lavra, before the Battle of Kulikovo, depicted in a painting by Ernst Lissner
The most powerful state to eventually arise after the destruction of Kievan Rus' was the Grand Duchy of Moscow ("Muscovy" in the Western chronicles), initially a part of Vladimir-Suzdal. While still under the domain of the Mongol-Tatars and with their connivance, Moscow began to assert its influence in the Central Rus' in the early 14th century, gradually becoming the leading force in the process of the Rus' lands' reunification and expansion of Russia.[citation needed] Moscow's last rival, the Novgorod Republic, prospered as the chief fur trade center and the easternmost port of the Hanseatic League.

Times remained difficult, with frequent Mongol-Tatar raids. Agriculture suffered from the beginning of the Little Ice Age. As in the rest of Europe, plague was a frequent occurrence between 1350 and 1490.[55] However, because of the lower population density and better hygiene—widespread practicing of banya, a wet steam bath—the death rate from plague was not as severe as in Western Europe,[56] and population numbers recovered by 1500.[55]

Led by Prince Dmitry Donskoy of Moscow and helped by the Russian Orthodox Church, the united army of Russian principalities inflicted a milestone defeat on the Mongol-Tatars in the Battle of Kulikovo in 1380. Moscow gradually absorbed the surrounding principalities, including formerly strong rivals such as Tver and Novgorod.

Ivan III ("the Great") finally threw off the control of the Golden Horde and consolidated the whole of Central and Northern Rus' under Moscow's dominion. He was also the first to take the title "Grand Duke of all the Russias".[57] After the fall of Constantinople in 1453, Moscow claimed succession to the legacy of the Eastern Roman Empire. Ivan III married Sophia Palaiologina, the niece of the last Byzantine emperor Constantine XI, and made the Byzantine double-headed eagle his own, and eventually Russia's, coat-of-arms.

Tsardom of Russia
Main article: Tsardom of Russia

Tsar Ivan the Terrible, illustration in Tsarsky Titulyarnik, 17th century
In development of the Third Rome ideas, the Grand Duke Ivan IV (the "Terrible")[58] was officially crowned first Tsar ("Caesar") of Russia in 1547. The Tsar promulgated a new code of laws (Sudebnik of 1550), established the first Russian feudal representative body (Zemsky Sobor) and introduced local self-management into the rural regions.[59][60]

During his long reign, Ivan the Terrible nearly doubled the already large Russian territory by annexing the three Tatar khanates (parts of the disintegrated Golden Horde): Kazan and Astrakhan along the Volga River, and the Siberian Khanate in southwestern Siberia. Thus, by the end of the 16th century Russia was transformed into a multiethnic, multidenominational and transcontinental state.

However, the Tsardom was weakened by the long and unsuccessful Livonian War against the coalition of Poland, Lithuania, and Sweden for access to the Baltic coast and sea trade.[61] At the same time, the Tatars of the Crimean Khanate, the only remaining successor to the Golden Horde, continued to raid Southern Russia.[62] In an effort to restore the Volga khanates, Crimeans and their Ottoman allies invaded central Russia and were even able to burn down parts of Moscow in 1571.[63] But in the next year the large invading army was thoroughly defeated by Russians in the Battle of Molodi, forever eliminating the threat of an Ottoman–Crimean expansion into Russia. The slave raids of Crimeans, however, did not cease until the late 17th century though the construction of new fortification lines across Southern Russia, such as the Great Abatis Line, constantly narrowed the area accessible to incursions.[64]


Kuzma Minin appeals to the people of Nizhny Novgorod to raise a volunteer army against the Polish invaders
The death of Ivan's sons marked the end of the ancient Rurik Dynasty in 1598, and in combination with the famine of 1601–03[65] led to civil war, the rule of pretenders, and foreign intervention during the Time of Troubles in the early 17th century.[66] The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth occupied parts of Russia, including Moscow. In 1612, the Poles were forced to retreat by the Russian volunteer corps, led by two national heroes, merchant Kuzma Minin and Prince Dmitry Pozharsky. The Romanov Dynasty acceded to the throne in 1613 by the decision of Zemsky Sobor, and the country started its gradual recovery from the crisis.

Russia continued its territorial growth through the 17th century, which was the age of Cossacks. Cossacks were warriors organized into military communities, resembling pirates and pioneers of the New World. In 1648, the peasants of Ukraine joined the Zaporozhian Cossacks in rebellion against Poland-Lithuania during the Khmelnytsky Uprising in reaction to the social and religious oppression they had been suffering under Polish rule. In 1654, the Ukrainian leader, Bohdan Khmelnytsky, offered to place Ukraine under the protection of the Russian Tsar, Aleksey I. Aleksey's acceptance of this offer led to another Russo-Polish War. Finally, Ukraine was split along the Dnieper River, leaving the western part, right-bank Ukraine, under Polish rule and the eastern part (Left-bank Ukraine and Kiev) under Russian rule. Later, in 1670–71, the Don Cossacks led by Stenka Razin initiated a major uprising in the Volga Region, but the Tsar's troops were successful in defeating the rebels.

In the east, the rapid Russian exploration and colonisation of the huge territories of Siberia was led mostly by Cossacks hunting for valuable furs and ivory. Russian explorers pushed eastward primarily along the Siberian River Routes, and by the mid-17th century there were Russian settlements in Eastern Siberia, on the Chukchi Peninsula, along the Amur River, and on the Pacific coast. In 1648, the Bering Strait between Asia and North America was passed for the first time by Fedot Popov and Semyon Dezhnyov.

Imperial Russia
Main article: Russian Empire

Peter the Great, Tsar of All Russia in 1682–1721 and the first Emperor of Russia in 1721–1725
Under Peter the Great, Russia was proclaimed an Empire in 1721 and became recognized as a world power. Ruling from 1682 to 1725, Peter defeated Sweden in the Great Northern War, forcing it to cede West Karelia and Ingria (two regions lost by Russia in the Time of Troubles),[67] as well as Estland and Livland, securing Russia's access to the sea and sea trade.[68] On the Baltic Sea Peter founded a new capital called Saint Petersburg, later known as Russia's "Window to Europe". Peter the Great's reforms brought considerable Western European cultural influences to Russia.

The reign of Peter I's daughter Elizabeth in 1741–62 saw Russia's participation in the Seven Years' War (1756–63). During this conflict Russia annexed East Prussia for a while and even took Berlin. However, upon Elisabeth's death, all these conquests were returned to the Kingdom of Prussia by pro-Prussian Peter III of Russia.

Catherine II ("the Great"), who ruled in 1762–96, presided over the Age of Russian Enlightenment. She extended Russian political control over the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth and incorporated most of its territories into Russia during the Partitions of Poland, pushing the Russian frontier westward into Central Europe. In the south, after successful Russo-Turkish Wars against Ottoman Turkey, Catherine advanced Russia's boundary to the Black Sea, defeating the Crimean Khanate. As a result of victories over Qajar Iran through the Russo-Persian Wars, by the first half of the 19th century Russia also made significant territorial gains in Transcaucasia and the North Caucasus, forcing the former to irrevocably cede what is nowadays Georgia, Dagestan, Azerbaijan and Armenia to Russia.[69][70] This continued with Alexander I's (1801–25) wresting of Finland from the weakened kingdom of Sweden in 1809 and of Bessarabia from the Ottomans in 1812. At the same time, Russians colonized Alaska and even founded settlements in California, such as Fort Ross.


Village Fair, by Boris Kustodiev
In 1803–1806, the first Russian circumnavigation was made, later followed by other notable Russian sea exploration voyages. In 1820, a Russian expedition discovered the continent of Antarctica.

In alliances with various European countries, Russia fought against Napoleon's France. The French invasion of Russia at the height of Napoleon's power in 1812 reached Moscow, but eventually failed miserably as the obstinate resistance in combination with the bitterly cold Russian winter led to a disastrous defeat of invaders, in which more than 95% of the pan-European Grande Armée perished.[71] Led by Mikhail Kutuzov and Barclay de Tolly, the Russian army ousted Napoleon from the country and drove through Europe in the war of the Sixth Coalition, finally entering Paris. Alexander I headed Russia's delegation at the Congress of Vienna that defined the map of post-Napoleonic Europe.

The officers of the Napoleonic Wars brought ideas of liberalism back to Russia with them and attempted to curtail the tsar's powers during the abortive Decembrist revolt of 1825. At the end of the conservative reign of Nicolas I (1825–55), a zenith period of Russia's power and influence in Europe was disrupted by defeat in the Crimean War. Between 1847 and 1851, about one million people died of Asiatic cholera.[72]

Nicholas's successor Alexander II (1855–81) enacted significant changes in the country, including the emancipation reform of 1861. These Great Reforms spurred industrialization and modernized the Russian army, which had successfully liberated Bulgaria from Ottoman rule in the 1877–78 Russo-Turkish War.


Emperor Nicholas II of Russia and his family were murdered by the Bolsheviks in 1918
The late 19th century saw the rise of various socialist movements in Russia. Alexander II was killed in 1881 by revolutionary terrorists, and the reign of his son Alexander III (1881–94) was less liberal but more peaceful. The last Russian Emperor, Nicholas II (1894–1917), was unable to prevent the events of the Russian Revolution of 1905, triggered by the unsuccessful Russo-Japanese War and the demonstration incident known as Bloody Sunday. The uprising was put down, but the government was forced to concede major reforms (Russian Constitution of 1906), including granting the freedoms of speech and assembly, the legalization of political parties, and the creation of an elected legislative body, the State Duma of the Russian Empire. The Stolypin agrarian reform led to a massive peasant migration and settlement into Siberia. More than four million settlers arrived in that region between 1906 and 1914.[73]

February Revolution and Russian Republic
Main articles: February Revolution, Russian Provisional Government, and Russian Republic
See also: Russian Constituent Assembly election, 1917 and Russian Democratic Federative Republic
In 1914, Russia entered World War I in response to Austria-Hungary's declaration of war on Russia's ally Serbia, and fought across multiple fronts while isolated from its Triple Entente allies. In 1916, the Brusilov Offensive of the Russian Army almost completely destroyed the military of Austria-Hungary. However, the already-existing public distrust of the regime was deepened by the rising costs of war, high casualties, and rumors of corruption and treason. All this formed the climate for the Russian Revolution of 1917, carried out in two major acts.

The February Revolution forced Nicholas II to abdicate; he and his family were imprisoned and later executed in Yekaterinburg during the Russian Civil War. The monarchy was replaced by a shaky coalition of political parties that declared itself the Provisional Government. On September 1 (14), 1917, upon a decree of the Provisional Government, the Russian Republic was proclaimed.[74] On January 6 (19), 1918, the Russian Constituent Assembly declared Russia a democratic federal republic (thus ratifying the Provisional Government's decision). The next day the Constituent Assembly was dissolved by the All-Russian Central Executive Committee.


White army Civil War-era propaganda poster
Soviet Russia and civil war
Main articles: October Revolution, Russian Civil War, and White movement
See also: Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic and Russian Constitution of 1918
An alternative socialist establishment existed alongside, the Petrograd Soviet, wielding power through the democratically elected councils of workers and peasants, called Soviets. The rule of the new authorities only aggravated the crisis in the country, instead of resolving it. Eventually, the October Revolution, led by Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin, overthrew the Provisional Government and gave full governing power to the Soviets, leading to the creation of the world's first socialist state.

Following the October Revolution, a civil war broke out between the anti-Communist White movement and the new Soviet regime with its Red Army. Bolshevist Russia lost its Ukrainian, Polish, Baltic, and Finnish territories by signing the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk that concluded hostilities with the Central Powers of World War I. The Allied powers launched an unsuccessful military intervention in support of anti-Communist forces. In the meantime both the Bolsheviks and White movement carried out campaigns of deportations and executions against each other, known respectively as the Red Terror and White Terror. By the end of the civil war, Russia's economy and infrastructure were heavily damaged. Millions became White émigrés,[75] and the Povolzhye famine of 1921 claimed up to 5 million victims.[76]

Soviet Union
Main articles: Soviet Union and History of the Soviet Union
See also: Treaty on the Creation of the USSR

The Russian SFSR at the moment of formation of the USSR in 1922

The Russian SFSR as a part of the USSR in 1940, after 1924–1936 intra-Soviet territorial changes and the separation of the Karelo-Finnish SSR in 1940
The Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (called Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic at the time), together with the Ukrainian, Byelorussian, and Transcaucasian Soviet Socialist Republics, formed the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), or Soviet Union, on December 30, 1922. Out of the 15 republics that would make up the USSR, the largest in size and over half of the total USSR population was the Russian SFSR, which came to dominate the union for its entire 69-year history.

Following Lenin's death in 1924, a troika was designated to govern the Soviet Union. However, Joseph Stalin, an elected General Secretary of the Communist Party, managed to suppress all opposition groups within the party and consolidate power in his hands. Leon Trotsky, the main proponent of world revolution, was exiled from the Soviet Union in 1929, and Stalin's idea of Socialism in One Country became the primary line. The continued internal struggle in the Bolshevik party culminated in the Great Purge, a period of mass repressions in 1937–38, during which hundreds of thousands of people were executed, including original party members and military leaders accused of coup d'état plots.[77]


Millions of Gulag inmates were forced to work on massive government projects such as the construction of the White Sea–Baltic Canal in 1931–1933
Under Stalin's leadership, the government launched a planned economy, industrialisation of the largely rural country, and collectivization of its agriculture. During this period of rapid economic and social change, millions of people were sent to penal labor camps,[78] including many political convicts for their opposition to Stalin's rule; millions were deported and exiled to remote areas of the Soviet Union.[78] The transitional disorganisation of the country's agriculture, combined with the harsh state policies and a drought, led to the Soviet famine of 1932–1933.[79] The Soviet Union, though with a heavy price, was transformed from a largely agrarian economy to a major industrial powerhouse in a short span of time.

Under the doctrine of state atheism in the Soviet Union, there was a "government-sponsored program of forced conversion to atheism" conducted by Communists.[80][81][82] The communist regime targeted religions based on State interests, and while most organized religions were never outlawed, religious property was confiscated, believers were harassed, and religion was ridiculed while atheism was propagated in schools.[citation needed] In 1925 the government founded the League of Militant Atheists to intensify the persecution.[83] Accordingly, although personal expressions of religious faith were not explicitly banned, a strong sense of social stigma was imposed on them by the official structures and mass media and it was generally considered unacceptable for members of certain professions (teachers, state bureaucrats, soldiers) to be openly religious. As for the Russian Orthodox Church, Soviet authorities sought to control it and, in times of national crisis, to exploit it for the regime's own purposes; but their ultimate goal was to eliminate it. During the first five years of Soviet power, the Bolsheviks executed 28 Russian Orthodox bishops and over 1,200 Russian Orthodox priests. Many others were imprisoned or exiled. Believers were harassed and persecuted. Most seminaries were closed, and the publication of most religious material was prohibited. By 1941 only 500 churches remained open out of about 54,000 in existence prior to World War I.

The Appeasement policy of Great Britain and France towards Adolf Hitler's annexation of Austria and Czechoslovakia did not stem an increase in the power of Nazi Germany. Around the same time, the Third Reich allied with the Empire of Japan, a rival of the USSR in the Far East and an open enemy of the USSR in the Soviet–Japanese Border Wars in 1938–39.


The siege of Leningrad during World War II was the deadliest siege of a city in history
In August 1939, the Soviet government decided to improve relations with Germany by concluding the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, pledging non-aggression between the two countries and dividing Eastern Europe into their respective spheres of influence. While Hitler conquered Poland and France and other countries acted on a single front at the start of World War II, the USSR was able to build up its military and occupy the Western Ukraine, Hertza region and Northern Bukovina as a result of the Soviet invasion of Poland, Winter War, occupation of the Baltic states and Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina.

On June 22, 1941, Nazi Germany broke the non-aggression treaty and invaded the Soviet Union with the largest and most powerful invasion force in human history,[84] opening the largest theater of World War II. Although the German army had considerable early success, their attack was halted in the Battle of Moscow. Subsequently, the Germans were dealt major defeats first at the Battle of Stalingrad in the winter of 1942–43,[85] and then in the Battle of Kursk in the summer of 1943. Another German failure was the Siege of Leningrad, in which the city was fully blockaded on land between 1941 and 1944 by German and Finnish forces, and suffered starvation and more than a million deaths, but never surrendered.[86] Under Stalin's administration and the leadership of such commanders as Georgy Zhukov and Konstantin Rokossovsky, Soviet forces took Eastern Europe in 1944–45 and captured Berlin in May 1945. In August 1945 the Soviet Army ousted the Japanese from China's Manchukuo and North Korea, contributing to the allied victory over Japan.


Sputnik 1 was the world's first artificial satellite
The 1941–45 period of World War II is known in Russia as the "Great Patriotic War". The Soviet Union together with the United States, the United Kingdom and China were considered as the Big Four of Allied powers in World War II [87] and later became the Four Policemen which was the foundation of the United Nations Security Council.[88] During this war, which included many of the most lethal battle operations in human history, Soviet military and civilian deaths were 10.6 million and 15.9 million respectively,[89] accounting for about a third of all World War II casualties. The full demographic loss to the Soviet peoples was even greater.[90] The Soviet economy and infrastructure suffered massive devastation which caused the Soviet famine of 1946–47[91] but the Soviet Union emerged as an acknowledged military superpower on the continent.


The RSFSR in 1956–1991, mostly after territorial acquisitions according to WWII treaties, the accession of Tuva in 1944, the transfer of the Crimean Oblast in 1954 and the incorporation of the Karelo-Finnish SSR in 1956. In 1991, the borders of the Russian SFSR became the Russian Federation's international borders with sovereign states
After the war, Eastern and Central Europe including East Germany and part of Austria was occupied by Red Army according to the Potsdam Conference. Dependent socialist governments were installed in the Eastern Bloc satellite states. Becoming the world's second nuclear weapons power, the USSR established the Warsaw Pact alliance and entered into a struggle for global dominance, known as the Cold War, with the United States and NATO. The Soviet Union supported revolutionary movements across the world, including the newly formed People's Republic of China, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and, later on, the Republic of Cuba. Significant amounts of Soviet resources were allocated in aid to the other socialist states.[92]

After Stalin's death and a short period of collective rule, the new leader Nikita Khrushchev denounced the cult of personality of Stalin and launched the policy of de-Stalinization. The penal labor system was reformed and many prisoners were released and rehabilitated (many of them posthumously).[93] The general easement of repressive policies became known later as the Khrushchev Thaw. At the same time, tensions with the United States heightened when the two rivals clashed over the deployment of the United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey and Soviet missiles in Cuba.

In 1957, the Soviet Union launched the world's first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1, thus starting the Space Age. Russia's cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human to orbit the Earth, aboard the Vostok 1 manned spacecraft on April 12, 1961.

Following the ousting of Khrushchev in 1964, another period of collective rule ensued, until Leonid Brezhnev became the leader. The era of the 1970s and the early 1980s was designated later as the Era of Stagnation, a period when economic growth slowed and social policies became static. The 1965 Kosygin reform aimed for partial decentralization of the Soviet economy and shifted the emphasis from heavy industry and weapons to light industry and consumer goods but was stifled by the conservative Communist leadership.


Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev and U.S. President Ronald Reagan in Red Square during the Moscow Summit, May 31, 1988
In 1979, after a Communist-led revolution in Afghanistan, Soviet forces entered that country. The occupation drained economic resources and dragged on without achieving meaningful political results. Ultimately, the Soviet Army was withdrawn from Afghanistan in 1989 due to international opposition, persistent anti-Soviet guerilla warfare, and a lack of support by Soviet citizens.


Russian President Boris Yeltsin stands on a tank during the August Coup of 1991, two months after the first presidential elections. The white-blue-red pre-revolutionary flag (in the bottom right corner) became the symbol of the antitotalitarian resistance and democratic transformation.[94]
From 1985 onwards, the last Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, who sought to enact liberal reforms in the Soviet system, introduced the policies of glasnost (openness) and perestroika (restructuring) in an attempt to end the period of economic stagnation and to democratise the government. This, however, led to the rise of strong nationalist and separatist movements. Prior to 1991, the Soviet economy was the second largest in the world,[95] but during its last years it was afflicted by shortages of goods in grocery stores, huge budget deficits, and explosive growth in the money supply leading to inflation.[96]

By 1991, economic and political turmoil began to boil over, as the Baltic republics chose to secede from the Soviet Union. On March 17, a referendum was held, in which the vast majority of participating citizens voted in favour of changing the Soviet Union into a renewed federation. In August 1991, a coup d'état attempt by members of Gorbachev's government, directed against Gorbachev and aimed at preserving the Soviet Union, instead led to the end of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. On December 25, 1991, the USSR was dissolved into 15 post-Soviet states.

Russian Federation
Main articles: History of Russia (1992–present), Russia and the United Nations, and 1993 Constitution of Russia
See also: Commonwealth of Independent States, War of Laws, and 1993 Russian constitutional crisis

Moscow International Business Center
In June 1991, Boris Yeltsin became the first directly elected President in Russian history when he was elected President of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, which became the independent Russian Federation in December of that year. During and after the disintegration of the Soviet Union, wide-ranging reforms including privatization and market and trade liberalization were undertaken,[97] including radical changes along the lines of "shock therapy" as recommended by the United States and the International Monetary Fund.[98] All this resulted in a major economic crisis, characterized by a 50% decline in both GDP and industrial output between 1990 and 1995.[97][99]

The privatization largely shifted control of enterprises from state agencies to individuals with inside connections in the government. Many of the newly rich moved billions in cash and assets outside of the country in an enormous capital flight.[100] The depression of the economy led to the collapse of social services; the birth rate plummeted while the death rate skyrocketed.[101] Millions plunged into poverty, from a level of 1.5% in the late Soviet era to 39–49% by mid-1993.[102] The 1990s saw extreme corruption and lawlessness, the rise of criminal gangs and violent crime.[103]

The 1990s were plagued by armed conflicts in the North Caucasus, both local ethnic skirmishes and separatist Islamist insurrections. From the time Chechen separatists declared independence in the early 1990s, an intermittent guerrilla war has been fought between the rebel groups and the Russian military. Terrorist attacks against civilians carried out by separatists, most notably the Moscow theater hostage crisis and Beslan school siege, caused hundreds of deaths and drew worldwide attention.

Russia took up the responsibility for settling the USSR's external debts, even though its population made up just half of the population of the USSR at the time of its dissolution.[104] High budget deficits caused the 1998 Russian financial crisis[105] and resulted in a further GDP decline.[97]


From left: Patriarch Alexy II, Vladimir Putin, Boris Yeltsin
On December 31, 1999, President Yeltsin unexpectedly resigned, handing the post to the recently appointed Prime Minister, Vladimir Putin, who then won the 2000 presidential election. Putin suppressed the Chechen insurgency although sporadic violence still occurs throughout the Northern Caucasus. High oil prices and the initially weak currency followed by increasing domestic demand, consumption, and investments has helped the economy grow for nine straight years, improving the standard of living and increasing Russia's influence on the world stage.[106] However, since the World economic crisis of 2008 and a subsequent drop in oil prices, Russia's economy has stagnated and poverty has again started to rise.[107] While many reforms made during the Putin presidency have been generally criticized by Western nations as undemocratic,[108] Putin's leadership over the return of order, stability, and progress has won him widespread admiration in Russia.[109]

On March 2, 2008, Dmitry Medvedev was elected President of Russia while Putin became Prime Minister. Putin returned to the presidency following the 2012 presidential elections, and Medvedev was appointed Prime Minister.

In 2014, after President Viktor Yanukovych of Ukraine fled as a result of a revolution, Putin requested and received authorization from the Russian Parliament to deploy Russian troops to Ukraine.[110][111][112][113][114] Following a Crimean referendum in which separation was favored by a large majority of voters,[115][116][117][118][119][120] the Russian leadership announced the accession of Crimea into the Russian Federation, though this and the referendum that preceded it were not accepted internationally. On March 27 the United Nations General Assembly voted in favor of a non-binding resolution opposing the Russian annexation of Crimea by a vote of 100 member states in favour, 11 against and 58 abstentions.[121]

In September 2015, Russia started military intervention in the Syrian Civil War, consisting of air strikes against militant groups of the Islamic State, al-Nusra Front (al-Qaeda in the Levant), and the Army of Conquest.

Politics
Main article: Politics of Russia
Governance
Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin
 President
Vladimir Putin
Dmitry Anatolyevich Medvedev
Coat of Arms of the Russian Federation 2.svg Prime Minister
Dmitry Medvedev
According to the Constitution of Russia, the country is a federation and semi-presidential republic, wherein the President is the head of state[122] and the Prime Minister is the head of government. The Russian Federation is fundamentally structured as a multi-party representative democracy, with the federal government composed of three branches:

Legislative: The bicameral Federal Assembly of Russia, made up of the 450-member State Duma and the 166-member Federation Council, adopts federal law, declares war, approves treaties, has the power of the purse and the power of impeachment of the President.
Executive: The President is the Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, can veto legislative bills before they become law, and appoints the Government of Russia (Cabinet) and other officers, who administer and enforce federal laws and policies.
Judiciary: The Constitutional Court, Supreme Court and lower federal courts, whose judges are appointed by the Federation Council on the recommendation of the President, interpret laws and can overturn laws they deem unconstitutional.
The president is elected by popular vote for a six-year term (eligible for a second term, but not for a third consecutive term).[123] Ministries of the government are composed of the Premier and his deputies, ministers, and selected other individuals; all are appointed by the President on the recommendation of the Prime Minister (whereas the appointment of the latter requires the consent of the State Duma). Leading political parties in Russia include United Russia, the Communist Party, the Liberal Democratic Party, and A Just Russia. In 2013, Russia was ranked as 122nd of 167 countries in the Democracy Index, compiled by The Economist Intelligence Unit,[124] while the World Justice Project, as of 2014, ranked Russia 80th of 99 countries surveyed in terms of rule of law.[125]

Foreign relations
Main article: Foreign relations of Russia

As a transcontinental country, Russia is a member of both the Council of Europe (COE) and the Asia Cooperation Dialogue.

The Russian Federation became the 39th member state of the Council of Europe on February 28, 1996

Member states, observers and partners of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO)
The Russian Federation is recognized in international law as a successor state of the former Soviet Union.[30] Russia continues to implement the international commitments of the USSR, and has assumed the USSR's permanent seat in the UN Security Council, membership in other international organisations, the rights and obligations under international treaties, and property and debts. Russia has a multifaceted foreign policy. As of 2009, it maintains diplomatic relations with 191 countries and has 144 embassies. The foreign policy is determined by the President and implemented by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Russia.[126]

As the successor to a former superpower, Russia's geopolitical status has often been debated, particularly in relation to unipolar and multipolar views on the global political system. While Russia is commonly accepted to be a great power, in recent years it has been characterized by a number of world leaders,[127][128] scholars,[129] commentators and politicians[130] as a currently reinstating or potential superpower.[131][page needed][132][better source needed][133]

As one of five permanent members of the UN Security Council, Russia plays a major role in maintaining international peace and security. The country participates in the Quartet on the Middle East and the Six-party talks with North Korea. Russia is a member of the G8 industrialized nations, the Council of Europe, OSCE, and APEC. Russia usually takes a leading role in regional organisations such as the CIS, EurAsEC, CSTO, and the SCO.[134] Russia became the 39th member state of the Council of Europe in 1996.[135] In 1998, Russia ratified the European Convention on Human Rights. The legal basis for EU relations with Russia is the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement, which came into force in 1997. The Agreement recalls the parties' shared respect for democracy and human rights, political and economic freedom and commitment to international peace and security.[136] In May 2003, the EU and Russia agreed to reinforce their cooperation on the basis of common values and shared interests.[137] Former President Vladimir Putin had advocated a strategic partnership with close integration in various dimensions including establishment of EU-Russia Common Spaces.[138] Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Russia has developed a friendlier relationship with the United States and NATO. The NATO-Russia Council was established in 2002 to allow the United States, Russia and the 27 allies in NATO to work together as equal partners to pursue opportunities for joint collaboration.[139]


Leaders of the BRICS nations in 2016: (l-r) Michel Temer of Brazil, Narendra Modi of India, Xi Jinping of China, Vladimir Putin of Russia and Jacob Zuma of South Africa
Russia maintains strong and positive relations with other BRIC countries. India is the largest customer of Russian military equipment and the two countries share extensive defense and strategic relations.[140] In recent years, the country has strengthened bilateral ties especially with the People's Republic of China by signing the Treaty of Friendship as well as building the Trans-Siberian oil pipeline and gas pipeline from Siberia to China.[141][142]

An important aspect of Russia's relations with the West is the criticism of Russia's political system and human rights management (including LGBT rights, media freedom, and reports about killed journalists) by Western governments, the mass media and the leading democracy and human rights watchdogs. In particular, such organisations as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch consider Russia to have not enough democratic attributes and to allow few political rights and civil liberties to its citizens.[143][144] Freedom House, an international organisation funded by the United States, ranks Russia as "not free", citing "carefully engineered elections" and "absence" of debate.[145] Russian authorities dismiss these claims and especially criticise Freedom House. The Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs has called the 2006 Freedom in the World report "prefabricated", stating that the human rights issues have been turned into a political weapon in particular by the United States. The ministry also claims that such organisations as Freedom House and Human Rights Watch use the same scheme of voluntary extrapolation of "isolated facts that of course can be found in any country" into "dominant tendencies".[146]

Military
Main article: Russian Armed Forces

Military-patriotic recreation park of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation

2015 Moscow Victory Day Parade: Russians at «Immortal regiment», carrying portraits of their ancestors who fought in World War II.
The Russian military is divided into the Ground Forces, Navy, and Air Force. There are also three independent arms of service: Strategic Missile Troops, Aerospace Defence Forces, and the Airborne Troops. In 2006, the military had 1.037 million personnel on active duty.[147] It is mandatory for all male citizens aged 18–27 to be drafted for a year of service in Armed Forces.[106]

Russia has the largest stockpile of nuclear weapons in the world. It has the second largest fleet of ballistic missile submarines and is the only country apart from the United States with a modern strategic bomber force.[35][148] Russia's tank force is the largest in the world, its surface navy and air force are among the largest ones.

The country has a large and fully indigenous arms industry, producing most of its own military equipment with only a few types of weapons imported. Russia is one of the world's top supplier of arms, a spot it has held since 2001, accounting for around 30% of worldwide weapons sales[149] and exporting weapons to about 80 countries.[150] The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, SIPRI, found that Russia was the second biggest exporter of arms in 2010–14, increasing their exports by 37 per cent from the period 2005–2009. In 2010–14, Russia delivered weapons to 56 states and to rebel forces in eastern Ukraine.[151]

The Russian government's published 2014 military budget is about 2.49 trillion rubles (approximately US$69.3 billion), the third largest in the world behind the US and China. The official budget is set to rise to 3.03 trillion rubles (approximately US$83.7 billion) in 2015, and 3.36 trillion rubles (approximately US$93.9 billion) in 2016.[152] However, unofficial estimates put the budget significantly higher, for example the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) 2013 Military Expenditure Database estimated Russia's military expenditure in 2012 at US$90.749 billion.[153] This estimate is an increase of more than US$18 billion on SIPRI's estimate of the Russian military budget for 2011 (US$71.9 billion).[154] As of 2014, Russia's military budget is higher than any other European nation.

Political divisions
Main article: Subdivisions of Russia
Federal subjects of Russia

Russian President Vladimir Putin and Akhmad Kadyrov, former rebel and head of the Chechen Republic, 2000

Russian President Dmitry Medvedev and President of Tatarstan Mintimer Shaimiyev in Kazan, the capital of Tatarstan, 2011
Federal subjects
According to the Constitution, the country comprises eighty-five federal subjects,[155] including the disputed Republic of Crimea and federal city of Sevastopol.[156] In 1993, when the Constitution was adopted, there were eighty-nine federal subjects listed, but later some of them were merged. These subjects have equal representation—two delegates each—in the Federation Council.[157] However, they differ in the degree of autonomy they enjoy.

46 oblasts (provinces): most common type of federal subjects, with locally elected governor and legislature.[158]
22 republics: nominally autonomous; each is tasked with drafting its own constitution, direct-elected[158] head of republic[159] or a similar post, and parliament. Republics are allowed to establish their own official language alongside Russian but are represented by the federal government in international affairs. Republics are meant to be home to specific ethnic minorities.
9 krais (territories): essentially the same as oblasts. The "territory" designation is historic, originally given to frontier regions and later also to the administrative divisions that comprised autonomous okrugs or autonomous oblasts.
4 autonomous okrugs (autonomous districts): originally autonomous entities within oblasts and krais created for ethnic minorities, their status was elevated to that of federal subjects in the 1990s. With the exception of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug, all autonomous okrugs are still administratively subordinated to a krai or an oblast of which they are a part.
1 autonomous oblast (the Jewish Autonomous Oblast): historically, autonomous oblasts were administrative units subordinated to krais. In 1990, all of them except for the Jewish AO were elevated in status to that of a republic.
3 federal cities (Moscow, Saint Petersburg, and Sevastopol): major cities that function as separate regions.
Further information: Political status of Crimea and Sevastopol and 2014 Crimean crisis
Federal districts
Federal subjects are grouped into eight federal districts, each administered by an envoy appointed by the President of Russia.[160] Unlike the federal subjects, the federal districts are not a subnational level of government, but are a level of administration of the federal government. Federal districts' envoys serve as liaisons between the federal subjects and the federal government and are primarily responsible for overseeing the compliance of the federal subjects with the federal laws.

Geography
Main article: Geography of Russia
See also: List of Russian explorers
Russia is located in Russia alt text for MoscowMoscowalt text for Saint PetersburgSt. Petersburgalt text for Veliky NovgorodNovgorodalt text for NovosibirskNovosibirskalt text for YekaterinburgYekaterinburgalt text for Nizhny NovgorodNizhny Novgorodalt text for KazanKazanalt text for ChelyabinskChelyabinskalt text for OmskOmskalt text for SamaraSamaraalt text for Rostov-on-DonRostovalt text for UfaUfaalt text for KrasnoyarskKrasnoyarskalt text for PermPermalt text for VoronezhVoronezhalt text for VolgogradVolgogradalt text for ArkhangelskArkhangelskalt text for PyatigorskPyatigorskalt text for SochiSochialt text for IrkutskIrkutskalt text for YakutskYakutskalt text for KhabarovskKhabarovskalt text for VladivostokVladivostokalt text for MagadanMagadanalt text for Yuzhno-SakhalinskYuzhno-Sakhalinskalt text for Petropavlovsk-KamchatskyPetropavlovsk-Kamchatskyalt text for KaliningradKaliningrad

Köppen climate types of Russia
Russia is the largest country in the world; its total area is 17,075,200 square kilometres (6,592,800 sq mi).[161][162] It lies between latitudes 41° and 82° N, and longitudes 19° E and 169° W.

Russia's territorial expansion was achieved largely in the late 16th century under the Cossack Yermak Timofeyevich during the reign of Ivan the Terrible, at a time when competing city-states in the western regions of Russia had banded together to form one country. Yermak mustered an army and pushed eastward where he conquered nearly all the lands once belonging to the Mongols, defeating their ruler, Khan Kuchum.[163]

Russia has a wide natural resource base, including major deposits of timber, petroleum, natural gas, coal, ores and other mineral resources.

Topography
The two most widely separated points in Russia are about 8,000 km (4,971 mi) apart along a geodesic line. These points are: a 60 km (37 mi) long Vistula Spit the boundary with Poland separating the Gdansk Bay from the Vistula Lagoon and the most southeastern point of the Kuril Islands. The points which are farthest separated in longitude are 6,600 km (4,101 mi) apart along a geodesic line. These points are: in the west, the same spit on the boundary with Poland, and in the east, the Big Diomede Island. The Russian Federation spans 11 time zones.


Mount Elbrus, the highest point of the Caucasus, Russia and Europe
Most of Russia consists of vast stretches of plains that are predominantly steppe to the south and heavily forested to the north, with tundra along the northern coast. Russia possesses 10% of the world's arable land.[164] Mountain ranges are found along the southern borders, such as the Caucasus (containing Mount Elbrus, which at 5,642 m (18,510 ft) is the highest point in both Russia and Europe) and the Altai (containing Mount Belukha, which at the 4,506 m (14,783 ft) is the highest point of Siberia outside of the Russian Far East); and in the eastern parts, such as the Verkhoyansk Range or the volcanoes of Kamchatka Peninsula (containing Klyuchevskaya Sopka, which at the 4,750 m (15,584 ft) is the highest active volcano in Eurasia as well as the highest point of Asian Russia). The Ural Mountains, rich in mineral resources, form a north-south range that divides Europe and Asia.

Russia has an extensive coastline of over 37,000 km (22,991 mi) along the Arctic and Pacific Oceans, as well as along the Baltic Sea, Sea of Azov, Black Sea and Caspian Sea.[106] The Barents Sea, White Sea, Kara Sea, Laptev Sea, East Siberian Sea, Chukchi Sea, Bering Sea, Sea of Okhotsk, and the Sea of Japan are linked to Russia via the Arctic and Pacific. Russia's major islands and archipelagos include Novaya Zemlya, the Franz Josef Land, the Severnaya Zemlya, the New Siberian Islands, Wrangel Island, the Kuril Islands, and Sakhalin. The Diomede Islands (one controlled by Russia, the other by the United States) are just 3 km (1.9 mi) apart, and Kunashir Island is about 20 km (12.4 mi) from Hokkaido, Japan.


Volga River in Samara Oblast
Russia has thousands of rivers and inland bodies of water, providing it with one of the world's largest surface water resources. Its lakes contain approximately one-quarter of the world's liquid fresh water.[165] The largest and most prominent of Russia's bodies of fresh water is Lake Baikal, the world's deepest, purest, oldest and most capacious fresh water lake.[166] Baikal alone contains over one-fifth of the world's fresh surface water.[165] Other major lakes include Ladoga and Onega, two of the largest lakes in Europe. Russia is second only to Brazil in volume of the total renewable water resources. Of the country's 100,000 rivers,[167] the Volga is the most famous, not only because it is the longest river in Europe, but also because of its major role in Russian history.[106] The Siberian rivers Ob, Yenisey, Lena and Amur are among the longest rivers in the world.

Climate
Main article: Climate of Russia

Taiga forest, Yugyd Va National Park in the Komi Republic

Sochi, Black Sea coast
The enormous size of Russia and the remoteness of many areas from the sea result in the dominance of the humid continental climate, which is prevalent in all parts of the country except for the tundra and the extreme southeast. Mountains in the south obstruct the flow of warm air masses from the Indian Ocean, while the plain of the west and north makes the country open to Arctic and Atlantic influences.[168]

Most of Northern European Russia and Siberia has a subarctic climate, with extremely severe winters in the inner regions of Northeast Siberia (mostly the Sakha Republic, where the Northern Pole of Cold is located with the record low temperature of -71.2 °C or -96.2 °F), and more moderate winters elsewhere. Both the strip of land along the shore of the Arctic Ocean and the Russian Arctic islands have a polar climate.

The coastal part of Krasnodar Krai on the Black Sea, most notably in Sochi, possesses a humid subtropical climate with mild and wet winters. In many regions of East Siberia and the Far East, winter is dry compared to summer; other parts of the country experience more even precipitation across seasons. Winter precipitation in most parts of the country usually falls as snow. The region along the Lower Volga and Caspian Sea coast, as well as some areas of southernmost Siberia, possesses a semi-arid climate.

[hide]Climate data for Russia (records)
Month	Jan	Feb	Mar	Apr	May	Jun	Jul	Aug	Sep	Oct	Nov	Dec	Year
Record high °C (°F)	22.2
(72)	23.8
(74.8)	30.3
(86.5)	34.0
(93.2)	37.7
(99.9)	43.2
(109.8)	45.4
(113.7)	43.5
(110.3)	41.5
(106.7)	33.7
(92.7)	29.1
(84.4)	25.0
(77)	45.4
(113.7)
Record low °C (°F)	-71.2
(-96.2)	-67.8
(-90)	-60.6
(-77.1)	-57.2
(-71)	-34.2
(-29.6)	-9.7
(14.5)	-9.3
(15.3)	-17.1
(1.2)	-25.3
(-13.5)	-48.7
(-55.7)	-58.5
(-73.3)	-64.5
(-84.1)	-71.2
(-96.2)
Source: Pogoda.ru.net[169]January record low:"February, April, May, October, December record low:[170]
Throughout much of the territory there are only two distinct seasons—winter and summer—as spring and autumn are usually brief periods of change between extremely low and extremely high temperatures.[168] The coldest month is January (February on the coastline); the warmest is usually July. Great ranges of temperature are typical. In winter, temperatures get colder both from south to north and from west to east. Summers can be quite hot, even in Siberia.[171] The continental interiors are the driest areas.

Biodiversity
Main articles: List of ecoregions in Russia, List of mammals of Russia, List of birds of Russia, List of freshwater fish of Russia, and Wildlife of Russia

The brown bear is a popular symbol of Russia, particularly in the West.
From north to south the East European Plain, also known as Russian Plain, is clad sequentially in Arctic tundra, coniferous forest (taiga), mixed and broad-leaf forests, grassland (steppe), and semi-desert (fringing the Caspian Sea), as the changes in vegetation reflect the changes in climate. Siberia supports a similar sequence but is largely taiga. Russia has the world's largest forest reserves,[172] known as "the lungs of Europe",[173] second only to the Amazon Rainforest in the amount of carbon dioxide it absorbs.

There are 266 mammal species and 780 bird species in Russia. A total of 415 animal species have been included in the Red Data Book of the Russian Federation as of 1997 and are now protected.[174] There are 28 UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Russia,[175] 40 UNESCO biosphere reserves,[176] 41 national parks and 101 nature reserves.

Economy
Main articles: Economy of Russia and Timeline of largest projects in the Russian economy

Moscow International Business Center
Russia has an upper-middle income mixed economy[177] with enormous natural resources, particularly oil and natural gas. It has the 12th largest economy in the world by nominal GDP and the 6th largest by purchasing power parity (PPP). Since the turn of the 21st century, higher domestic consumption and greater political stability have bolstered economic growth in Russia. The country ended 2008 with its ninth straight year of growth, but growth has slowed with the decline in the price of oil and gas. Real GDP per capita, PPP (current international) was 19,840 in 2010.[178] Growth was primarily driven by non-traded services and goods for the domestic market, as opposed to oil or mineral extraction and exports.[106] The average nominal salary in Russia was $967 per month in early 2013, up from $80 in 2000.[179][180] In May 2016 the average nominal monthly wages fell below $450 per month,[181] and tax on the income of individuals is payable at the rate of 13% on most incomes.[182] Approximately 19.2 million of Russians lived below the national poverty line in 2016,[183] significantly up from 16.1 million in 2015.[102] Unemployment in Russia was 5.4% in 2014, down from about 12.4% in 1999.[184] Officially, about 20–25% of the Russian population is categorized as middle class; however some economists and sociologists think this figure is inflated and the real fraction is about 7%.[185] After the United States, the European Union and other countries imposed economic sanctions after the annexation of Crimea and a collapse in oil prices, the proportion of middle-class could decrease drastically.[186]


Russia's GDP by purchasing power parity (PPP) since 1989 (in international dollars adjusted for both purchasing power and inflation at 2013 prices).
Oil, natural gas, metals, and timber account for more than 80% of Russian exports abroad.[106] Since 2003, the exports of natural resources started decreasing in economic importance as the internal market strengthened considerably. As of 2012 the oil-and-gas sector accounted for 16% of GDP, 52% of federal budget revenues and over 80% of total exports.[187][188][189] Oil export earnings allowed Russia to increase its foreign reserves from $12 billion in 1999 to $597.3 billion on August 1, 2008. As of April 2017, foreign reserves in Russia fell to 332 USD Billion.[190] The macroeconomic policy under Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin was prudent and sound, with excess income being stored in the Stabilization Fund of Russia.[191] In 2006, Russia repaid most of its formerly massive debts,[192] leaving it with one of the lowest foreign debts among major economies.[193] The Stabilization Fund helped Russia to come out of the global financial crisis in a much better state than many experts had expected.[191]

A simpler, more streamlined tax code adopted in 2001 reduced the tax burden on people and dramatically increased state revenue.[194] Russia has a flat tax rate of 13%. This ranks it as the country with the second most attractive personal tax system for single managers in the world after the United Arab Emirates.[195] According to Bloomberg, Russia is considered well ahead of most other resource-rich countries in its economic development, with a long tradition of education, science, and industry.[196] The country has a higher proportion of higher education graduates than any other country in Eurasia.[197]


On May 21, 2014, Russia and China signed a $400 billion gas deal. Starting 2019 Russia plans to provide natural gas to China for the next 30 years.
The economic development of the country has been uneven geographically with the Moscow region contributing a very large share of the country's GDP.[198] Inequality of household income and wealth has also been noted, with Credit Suisse finding Russian wealth distribution so much more extreme than other countries studied it "deserves to be placed in a separate category."[199][200] Another problem is modernisation of infrastructure, ageing and inadequate after years of being neglected in the 1990s; the government has said $1 trillion will be invested in development of infrastructure by 2020.[201] In December 2011, Russia finally[clarification needed] joined the World Trade Organisation, allowing it a greater access to overseas markets. Some analysts estimate that WTO membership could bring the Russian economy a bounce of up to 3% annually.[202] Russia ranks as the second-most corrupt country in Europe (after Ukraine), according to the Corruption Perceptions Index. The Norwegian-Russian Chamber of Commerce also states that "[c]orruption is one of the biggest problems both Russian and international companies have to deal with".[203] Corruption in Russia is perceived as a significant problem[204] impacting all aspects of life, including public administration,[205][206] law enforcement,[207] healthcare[208] and education.[209] The phenomenon of corruption is strongly established in the historical model of public governance in Russia and attributed to general weakness of rule of law in Russia.[205] According to 2016 results of Corruption Perception Index of Transparency International, Russia ranked 131th place out of 176 countries with score 29.[210]

There are many different estimates of the actual cost of corruption.[211] According to official government statistics from Rosstat, the "shadow economy" occupied only 15% of Russia's GDP in 2011, and this included unreported salaries (to avoid taxes and social payments) and other types of tax evasion.[212] According to Rosstat's estimates, corruption in 2011 amounted to only 3.5 to 7% of GDP. In comparison, some independent experts maintain that corruption consumes as much of 25% of Russia's GDP.[213] A World Bank report puts this figure at 48%.[214] There is also an interesting shift in the main focus of bribery: whereas previously officials took bribes to shut their eyes to legal infractions, they now take them simply to perform their duties.[215] Many experts admit that in recent years corruption in Russia has become a business. In the 1990s, businessmen had to pay different criminal groups to provide a "krysha" (literally, a "roof", i.e., protection). Nowadays, this "protective" function is performed by officials. Corrupt hierarchies characterize different sectors of the economy,[211] including education.[211]

In the end, the Russian population pays for this corruption.[211] For example, some experts believe that the rapid increases in tariffs for housing, water, gas and electricity, which significantly outpace the rate of inflation, are a direct result of high volumes of corruption at the highest levels.[216] In the recent years the reaction to corruption has changed: starting from Putin's second term, very few corruption cases have been the subject of outrage. Putin's system is remarkable for its ubiquitous and open merging of the civil service and business, as well as its use of relatives, friends, and acquaintances to benefit from budgetary expenditures and take over state property. Corporate, property, and land raiding is commonplace.[211]

On March 26, 2017, protests against alleged corruption in the federal Russian government took place simultaneously in many cities across the country.[217] They were triggered by the lack of proper response from the Russian authorities to the published investigative film He Is Not Dimon To You, which has garnered more than 20 million views on YouTube. A new wave of mass protests has been announced for June 12, 2017.[218]


Over two million VAZ-2105s were produced from 1980 to 2010.

A Lada Vesta. Lada is the brand of AvtoVAZ, the largest Russian car manufacturer.
The Russian central bank announced plans in 2013 to free float the Russian ruble in 2015. According to a stress test conducted by the central bank Russian financial system would be able to handle a currency decline of 25%–30% without major central bank interference. However, the Russian economy began stagnating in late 2013 and in combination with the War in Donbass is in danger of entering stagflation, slow growth and high inflation. The recent decline in the Russian ruble has increased the costs for Russian companies to make interest payments on debt issued in U.S. dollar or other foreign currencies that have strengthened against the ruble; thus it costs Russian companies more of their ruble-denominated revenue to repay their debt holders in dollars or other foreign currencies.[219] As of March 2016, the ruble was devalued more than 50 percent since July 2014.[220] Moreover, after bringing inflation down to 3.6% in 2012, the lowest rate since gaining independence from the Soviet Union, inflation in Russia jumped to nearly 7.5% in 2014, causing the central bank to increase its lending rate to 8% from 5.5% in 2013.[221][222][223] In an October 2014 article in Bloomberg Business Week, it was reported that Russia had significantly started shifting its economy towards China in response to increasing financial tensions following its annexation of Crimea and subsequent Western economic sanctions.[224]

Agriculture
Main articles: Agriculture in Russia and Fishing industry in Russia

Rye Fields, by Ivan Shishkin. Russia is the world's top producer of barley, buckwheat and oats, and one of the largest producers and exporters of rye, sunflower seed and wheat.
Russia's total area of cultivated land is estimated at 1,237,294 square kilometres (477,722 sq mi), the fourth largest in the world.[225] From 1999 to 2009, Russia's agriculture grew steadily,[226] and the country turned from a grain importer to the third largest grain exporter after the EU and the United States.[227] The production of meat has grown from 6,813,000 tonnes in 1999 to 9,331,000 tonnes in 2008, and continues to grow.[228]

This restoration of agriculture was supported by a credit policy of the government, helping both individual farmers and large privatized corporate farms that once were Soviet kolkhozes and which still own the significant share of agricultural land.[229] While large farms concentrate mainly on grain production and husbandry products, small private household plots produce most of the country's potatoes, vegetables and fruits.[230]

Since Russia borders three oceans (the Atlantic, Arctic, and Pacific), Russian fishing fleets are a major world fish supplier. Russia captured 3,191,068 tons of fish in 2005.[231] Both exports and imports of fish and sea products grew significantly in recent years, reaching $2,415 and $2,036 million, respectively, in 2008.[232]

Sprawling from the Baltic Sea to the Pacific Ocean, Russia has more than a fifth of the world's forests, which makes it the largest forest country in the world.[172][233] However, according to a 2012 study by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the Government of the Russian Federation,[234] the considerable potential of Russian forests is underutilized and Russia's share of the global trade in forest products is less than four percent.[235]

Energy
Main articles: Energy in Russia and Nuclear power in Russia

Russia is a key oil and gas supplier to much of Europe.
In recent years, Russia has frequently been described in the media as an energy superpower.[236][237] The country has the world's largest natural gas reserves,[238] the 8th largest oil reserves,[239] and the second largest coal reserves.[240] Russia is the world's leading natural gas exporter[241] and second largest natural gas producer,[34] while also the largest oil exporter and the largest oil producer.[33]

Russia is the 3rd largest electricity producer in the world[242] and the 5th largest renewable energy producer, the latter because of the well-developed hydroelectricity production in the country.[243] Large cascades of hydropower plants are built in European Russia along big rivers like the Volga. The Asian part of Russia also features a number of major hydropower stations; however, the gigantic hydroelectric potential of Siberia and the Russian Far East largely remains unexploited.

Russia was the first country to develop civilian nuclear power and to construct the world's first nuclear power plant. Currently the country is the 4th largest nuclear energy producer,[244] with all nuclear power in Russia being managed by Rosatom State Corporation. The sector is rapidly developing, with an aim of increasing the total share of nuclear energy from current 16.9% to 23% by 2020. The Russian government plans to allocate 127 billion rubles ($5.42 billion) to a federal program dedicated to the next generation of nuclear energy technology. About 1 trillion rubles ($42.7 billion) is to be allocated from the federal budget to nuclear power and industry development before 2015.[245]

In May 2014 on a two-day trip to Shanghai, President Putin signed a deal on behalf of Gazprom for the Russian energy giant to supply China with 38 billion cubic meters of natural gas per year. Construction of a pipeline to facilitate the deal was agreed whereby Russia would contribute $55bn to the cost, and China $22bn, in what Putin described as "the world's biggest construction project for the next four years." The natural gas would begin to flow sometime between 2018 and 2020 and would continue for 30 years at an ultimate cost to China of $400bn.[246]

Transport
Main articles: Transport in Russia, History of rail transport in Russia, and Rail transport in Russia

The marker for kilometre 9288 at the end of the Trans-Siberian Railway in Vladivostok
Railway transport in Russia is mostly under the control of the state-run Russian Railways monopoly. The company accounts for over 3.6% of Russia's GDP and handles 39% of the total freight traffic (including pipelines) and more than 42% of passenger traffic.[247] The total length of common-used railway tracks exceeds 85,500 km (53,127 mi),[247] second only to the United States. Over 44,000 km (27,340 mi) of tracks are electrified,[248] which is the largest number in the world, and additionally there are more than 30,000 km (18,641 mi) of industrial non-common carrier lines. Railways in Russia, unlike in the most of the world, use broad gauge of 1,520 mm (4 ft 11 27/32 in), with the exception of 957 km (595 mi) on Sakhalin island using narrow gauge of 1,067 mm (3 ft 6 in). The most renowned railway in Russia is Trans-Siberian (Transsib), spanning a record 7 time zones and serving the longest single continuous services in the world, Moscow-Vladivostok (9,259 km (5,753 mi)), Moscow–Pyongyang (10,267 km (6,380 mi))[249] and Kiev–Vladivostok (11,085 km (6,888 mi)).[250]

As of 2006 Russia had 933,000 km of roads, of which 755,000 were paved.[251] Some of these make up the Russian federal motorway system. With a large land area the road density is the lowest of all the G8 and BRIC countries.[252]

Much of Russia's inland waterways, which total 102,000 km (63,380 mi), are made up of natural rivers or lakes. In the European part of the country the network of channels connects the basins of major rivers. Russia's capital, Moscow, is sometimes called "the port of the five seas", because of its waterway connections to the Baltic, White, Caspian, Azov and Black Seas.


Yamal, one of Russia's nuclear-powered icebreakers[253]
Major sea ports of Russia include Rostov-on-Don on the Azov Sea, Novorossiysk on the Black Sea, Astrakhan and Makhachkala on the Caspian, Kaliningrad and St Petersburg on the Baltic, Arkhangelsk on the White Sea, Murmansk on the Barents Sea, Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky and Vladivostok on the Pacific Ocean. In 2008 the country owned 1,448 merchant marine ships. The world's only fleet of nuclear-powered icebreakers advances the economic exploitation of the Arctic continental shelf of Russia and the development of sea trade through the Northern Sea Route between Europe and East Asia.

By total length of pipelines Russia is second only to the United States. Currently many new pipeline projects are being realized, including Nord Stream and South Stream natural gas pipelines to Europe, and the Eastern Siberia – Pacific Ocean oil pipeline (ESPO) to the Russian Far East and China.

Russia has 1,216 airports,[254] the busiest being Sheremetyevo, Domodedovo, and Vnukovo in Moscow, and Pulkovo in St. Petersburg.

Typically, major Russian cities have well-developed systems of public transport, with the most common varieties of exploited vehicles being bus, trolleybus and tram. Seven Russian cities, namely Moscow, Saint Petersburg, Nizhny Novgorod, Novosibirsk, Samara, Yekaterinburg, and Kazan, have underground metros, while Volgograd features a metrotram. The total length of metros in Russia is 465.4 kilometres (289.2 mi). Moscow Metro and Saint Petersburg Metro are the oldest in Russia, opened in 1935 and 1955 respectively. These two are among the fastest and busiest metro systems in the world, and some of them are famous for rich decorations and unique designs of their stations, which is a common tradition in Russian metros and railways.

Science and technology
Main articles: Timeline of Russian inventions and technology records, Science and technology in Russia, List of Russian scientists, and List of Russian inventors

Mikhail Lomonosov, polymath scientist, inventor, poet and artist

Ivan Pavlov (1849–1936), physiologist, Nobel Prize laureate in 1904
Science and technology in Russia blossomed since the Age of Enlightenment, when Peter the Great founded the Russian Academy of Sciences and Saint Petersburg State University, and polymath Mikhail Lomonosov established the Moscow State University, paving the way for a strong native tradition in learning and innovation. In the 19th and 20th centuries the country produced a large number of notable scientists and inventors.

The Russian physics school began with Lomonosov who proposed the law of conservation of matter preceding the energy conservation law. Russian discoveries and inventions in physics include the electric arc, electrodynamical Lenz's law, space groups of crystals, photoelectric cell, superfluidity, Cherenkov radiation, electron paramagnetic resonance, heterotransistors and 3D holography. Lasers and masers were co-invented by Nikolai Basov and Alexander Prokhorov, while the idea of tokamak for controlled nuclear fusion was introduced by Igor Tamm, Andrei Sakharov and Lev Artsimovich, leading eventually the modern international ITER project, where Russia is a party.

Since the time of Nikolay Lobachevsky (the "Copernicus of Geometry" who pioneered the non-Euclidean geometry) and a prominent tutor Pafnuty Chebyshev, the Russian mathematical school became one of the most influential in the world.[255] Chebyshev's students included Aleksandr Lyapunov, who founded the modern stability theory, and Andrey Markov who invented the Markov chains. In the 20th century Soviet mathematicians, such as Andrey Kolmogorov, Israel Gelfand, and Sergey Sobolev, made major contributions to various areas of mathematics. Nine Soviet/Russian mathematicians were awarded with the Fields Medal, a most prestigious award in mathematics. Recently Grigori Perelman was offered the first ever Clay Millennium Prize Problems Award for his final proof of the Poincaré conjecture in 2002.[256]

Russian chemist Dmitry Mendeleev invented the Periodic table, the main framework of modern chemistry. Aleksandr Butlerov was one of the creators of the theory of chemical structure, playing a central role in organic chemistry. Russian biologists include Dmitry Ivanovsky who discovered viruses, Ivan Pavlov who was the first to experiment with the classical conditioning, and Ilya Mechnikov who was a pioneer researcher of the immune system and probiotics.

Many Russian scientists and inventors were émigrés, like Igor Sikorsky, who built the first airliners and modern-type helicopters; Vladimir Zworykin, often called the father of TV; chemist Ilya Prigogine, noted for his work on dissipative structures and complex systems; Nobel Prize-winning economists Simon Kuznets and Wassily Leontief; physicist Georgiy Gamov (an author of the Big Bang theory) and social scientist Pitirim Sorokin. Many foreigners worked in Russia for a long time, like Leonard Euler and Alfred Nobel.

Russian inventions include arc welding by Nikolay Benardos, further developed by Nikolay Slavyanov, Konstantin Khrenov and other Russian engineers. Gleb Kotelnikov invented the knapsack parachute, while Evgeniy Chertovsky introduced the pressure suit. Alexander Lodygin and Pavel Yablochkov were pioneers of electric lighting, and Mikhail Dolivo-Dobrovolsky introduced the first three-phase electric power systems, widely used today. Sergei Lebedev invented the first commercially viable and mass-produced type of synthetic rubber. The first ternary computer, Setun, was developed by Nikolay Brusentsov.


The Sukhoi Su-57 is a fifth-generation jet fighter being developed for the Russian Air Force.

Soviet and Russian space station Mir

Soyuz TMA-2 is launched from Baikonur, Kazakhstan, carrying one of the first resident crews to the International Space Station
In the 20th century a number of prominent Soviet aerospace engineers, inspired by the fundamental works of Nikolai Zhukovsky, Sergei Chaplygin and others, designed many hundreds of models of military and civilian aircraft and founded a number of KBs (Construction Bureaus) that now constitute the bulk of Russian United Aircraft Corporation. Famous Russian aircraft include the civilian Tu-series, Su and MiG fighter aircraft, Ka and Mi-series helicopters; many Russian aircraft models are on the list of most produced aircraft in history.

Famous Russian battle tanks include T34, the most heavily produced tank design of World War II,[257] and further tanks of T-series, including the most produced tank in history, T54/55.[258] The AK47 and AK74 by Mikhail Kalashnikov constitute the most widely used type of assault rifle throughout the world—so much so that more AK-type rifles have been manufactured than all other assault rifles combined.[259]

With all these achievements, however, since the late Soviet era Russia was lagging behind the West in a number of technologies, mostly those related to energy conservation and consumer goods production. The crisis of the 1990s led to the drastic reduction of the state support for science and a brain drain migration from Russia.

In the 2000s, on the wave of a new economic boom, the situation in the Russian science and technology has improved, and the government launched a campaign aimed into modernisation and innovation. Russian President Dmitry Medvedev formulated top priorities for the country's technological development:

Efficient energy use
Information technology, including both common products and the products combined with space technology
Nuclear energy
Pharmaceuticals[260]
Currently Russia has completed the GLONASS satellite navigation system. The country is developing its own fifth-generation jet fighter and constructing the first serial mobile nuclear plant in the world.

Space exploration
Russian achievements in the field of space technology and space exploration are traced back to Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, the father of theoretical astronautics.[261] His works had inspired leading Soviet rocket engineers, such as Sergey Korolyov, Valentin Glushko, and many others who contributed to the success of the Soviet space program in the early stages of the Space Race and beyond.

In 1957 the first Earth-orbiting artificial satellite, Sputnik 1, was launched; in 1961 the first human trip into space was successfully made by Yury Gagarin. Many other Soviet and Russian space exploration records ensued, including the first spacewalk performed by Alexey Leonov, Luna 9 was the first spacecraft to land on the Moon, Venera 7 was the first to land on another planet (Venus), Mars 3 then the first to land on Mars, the first space exploration rover Lunokhod 1, and the first space station Salyut 1 and Mir.

After the collapse of the Soviet Union, some government-funded space exploration programs, including the Buran space shuttle program, were cancelled or delayed, while participation of the Russian space industry in commercial activities and international cooperation intensified. Nowadays Russia is the largest satellite launcher.[262] After the United States Space Shuttle program ended in 2011, Soyuz rockets became the only provider of transport for astronauts at the International Space Station.

Water supply and sanitation
Main article: Water supply and sanitation in Russia
In Russia, approximately 70 per cent of drinking water comes from surface water and 30 per cent from groundwater. In 2004, water supply systems had a total capacity of 90 million cubic metres a day. The average residential water use was 248 litres per capita per day.[263] One fourth of the world's fresh surface and groundwater is located in Russia. The water utilities sector is one of the largest industries in Russia serving the entire Russian population.

Demographics
Main articles: Demographics of Russia and Rossiyane

Federal subjects by population density. The population is most dense in the European part of the country, with milder climate, centering on Moscow, St Petersburg and other cities.

Percentage of ethnic Russians by region in 2010
  >80%
  70—79%
  50—69%
  20—49%
  <20%

Natural population growth rate in Russia, 2015.
Ethnic Russians comprise 81% of the country's population.[1] The Russian Federation is also home to several sizeable minorities. In all, 160 different other ethnic groups and indigenous peoples live within its borders.[264] Though Russia's population is comparatively large, its density is low because of the country's enormous size. Population is densest in European Russia, near the Ural Mountains, and in southwest Siberia. 73% of the population lives in urban areas while 27% in rural ones.[265] The results of the 2010 Census show a total population of 142,856,536.[266]

Russia's population peaked at 148,689,000 in 1991, just before the dissolution of the Soviet Union. It began to experience a rapid decline starting in the mid-1990s.[267] The decline has slowed to near stagnation in recent years because of reduced death rates, increased birth rates and increased immigration.[268]

In 2009, Russia recorded annual population growth for the first time in fifteen years, with total growth of 10,500.[268] 279,906 migrants arrived to the Russian Federation the same year, of which 93% came from CIS countries.[268] The number of Russian emigrants steadily declined from 359,000 in 2000 to 32,000 in 2009.[268] There are also an estimated 10 million illegal immigrants from the ex-Soviet states in Russia.[269] Russia is home to approximately 116 million ethnic Russians[264] and about 20 million ethnic Russians live outside Russia in the former republics of the Soviet Union,[270] mostly in Ukraine and Kazakhstan.[271]

The 2010 census recorded 81% of the population as ethnically Russian, and 19% as other ethnicities:[1] 3.7% Tatars; 1.4% Ukrainians; 1.1% Bashkirs; 1% Chuvashes; 11.8% others and unspecified. According to the Census, 84.93% of the Russian population belongs to European ethnic groups (Slavic, Germanic, Finnic other than Ugric, Greek, and others). This is a decline from the 2002, when they constituted for more than 86% of the population.[1]

Russia's birth rate is higher than that of most European countries (13.3 births per 1000 people in 2014[268] compared to the European Union average of 10.1 per 1000),[272] but its death rate is also substantially higher (in 2014, Russia's death rate was 13.1 per 1000 people[268] compared to the EU average of 9.7 per 1000).[272] The Russian Ministry of Health and Social Affairs predicted that by 2011 the death rate would equal the birth rate because of increase in fertility and decline in mortality.[273] The government is implementing a number of programs designed to increase the birth rate and attract more migrants. Monthly government child-assistance payments were doubled to US$55, and a one-time payment of US$9,200 was offered to women who had a second child since 2007.[274]

In 2006, in a bid to compensate for the country's demographic decline, the Russian government started simplifying immigration laws and launched a state program "for providing assistance to voluntary immigration of ethnic Russians from former Soviet republics".[275] In 2009 Russia experienced its highest birth rate since the dissolution of the Soviet Union.[268][276] In 2012, the birth rate increased again. Russia recorded 1,896,263 births, the highest number since 1990, and even exceeding annual births during the period 1967–1969, with a TFR of about 1.7, the highest since 1991. (Source: Vital statistics table below)

In August 2012, as the country saw its first demographic growth since the 1990s, President Putin declared that Russia's population could reach 146 million by 2025, mainly as a result of immigration.[277]

Largest cities
Main article: List of cities and towns in Russia by population
  v t e
Largest cities or towns in Russia
Rosstat (2016[278][279]/2017)
Rank	Name	Federal subject	Pop.	Rank	Name	Federal subject	Pop.	
Moscow
Moscow
Saint Petersburg
Saint Petersburg	1	Moscow	Moscow	[280]12,381,000	11	Rostov-na-Donu	Rostov Oblast	1,120,000	Novosibirsk
Novosibirsk
Yekaterinburg
Yekaterinburg
2	Saint Petersburg	Saint Petersburg	[280]5,282,000	12	Krasnoyarsk	Krasnoyarsk Krai	[281]1,084,000
3	Novosibirsk	Novosibirsk Oblast	[282]1,603,000	13	Perm	Perm Krai	1,042,000
4	Yekaterinburg	Sverdlovsk Oblast	[283]1,456,000	14	Voronezh	Voronezh Oblast	1,032,000
5	Nizhny Novgorod	Nizhny Novgorod Oblast	1,267,000	15	Volgograd	Volgograd Oblast	1,016,000
6	Kazan	Tatarstan	[284]1,232,000	16	Krasnodar	Krasnodar Krai	[285]881,000
7	Chelyabinsk	Chelyabinsk Oblast	[286]1,199,000	17	Saratov	Saratov Oblast	843,000
8	Omsk	Omsk Oblast	[287]1,178,000	18	Tolyatti	Samara Oblast	[288]711,000
9	Samara	Samara Oblast	[288]1,170,000	19	Izhevsk	Udmurtia	[289]646,000
10	Ufa	Bashkortostan	[290]1,126,000	20	Ulyanovsk	Ulyanovsk Oblast	622,000
Ethnic groups
Main article: Ethnic groups in Russia
Russia is a multi-national state with over 170 ethnic groups designated as nationalities; the populations of these groups vary enormously, from millions (e.g., Russians and Tatars) to under 10,000 (e.g., Samis and Inuit).[291]

Ethnic groups in Russia

Russian Cossack family in Siberia

 

Yakuts in Sakha Republic

 

Armenians in Volgograd

 

Komi peoples

 

Kalmyks in Elista

 

Northern Caucasus folk costumes: (l-r) Ossetians, Circassians, Kabardians, and Chechens.

Language

Area where Russian language is spoken as an official or a minority language
Main articles: Russian language, Languages of Russia, and List of endangered languages in Russia
Russia's 160 ethnic groups speak some 100 languages.[13] According to the 2002 Census, 142.6 million people speak Russian, followed by Tatar with 5.3 million and Ukrainian with 1.8 million speakers.[292] Russian is the only official state language, but the Constitution gives the individual republics the right to establish their own state languages in addition to Russian.[293]

Despite its wide distribution, the Russian language is homogeneous throughout the country. Russian is the most geographically widespread language of Eurasia, as well as the most widely spoken Slavic language.[294] It belongs to the Indo-European language family and is one of the living members of the East Slavic languages, the others being Belarusian and Ukrainian (and possibly Rusyn). Written examples of Old East Slavic (Old Russian) are attested from the 10th century onwards.[295]

Russian is the second-most used language on the Internet after English,[296] one of two official languages aboard the International Space Station[297] and is one of the six official languages of the UN.[298]

35 languages are officially recognized in Russia in various regions by local governments.


Distribution of Uralic, Altaic, and Yukaghir languages

Geographical distribution of Finno-Ugric and Samoyedic peoples

Ethnolinguistic groups in the Caucasus region
Language	Language family	Federal subject(s)	Source
Abaza	Northwest Caucasian	 Karachay-Cherkessia	[299]
Adyghe	Northwest Caucasian	 Adygea	[300]
Altai	Turkic	 Altai Republic	[301][302]
Bashkir	Turkic	 Bashkortostan	;[303] see also regional law
Buryat	Mongolic	 Buryatia	[304]
Chechen	Northeast Caucasian	 Chechnya	[305]
Cherkess	Northwest Caucasian	 Karachay-Cherkessia	[299]
Chuvash	Turkic	 Chuvashia	[306]
Crimean Tatar	Turkic	 Republic of Crimea	[307]
Erzya	Uralic	 Mordovia	[308]
Ingush	Northeast Caucasian	 Ingushetia	[309]
Kabardian	Northwest Caucasian	 Kabardino-Balkaria	[310]
Kalmyk	Mongolic	 Kalmykia	[311]
Karachay-Balkar	Turkic	 Kabardino-Balkaria
 Karachay-Cherkessia	[299][310]
Khakas	Turkic	 Khakassia	[312]
Komi	Uralic	 Komi Republic	[313]
Hill Mari	Uralic	 Mari El	[314]
Meadow Mari	Uralic	 Mari El	[314]
Moksha	Uralic	 Mordovia	[308]
Nogai	Turkic	 Karachay-Cherkessia	[299]
Ossetic	Indo-European	 North Ossetia–Alania	[315]
Tatar	Turkic	 Tatarstan	[316]
Tuvan	Turkic	 Tuva	[317]
Udmurt	Uralic	 Udmurtia	[318]
Ukrainian	Indo-European	 Republic of Crimea	[307]
Yakut	Turkic	 Sakha Republic	[319]
Religion
Main articles: Religion in Russia and Consecration of Russia
Religion in Russia as of 2012 (Sreda Arena Atlas)[320][321]
Russian Orthodoxy	
?
41.1%
Other Orthodox	
?
1.8%
Other Christians	
?
4.5%
Islam	
?
6.6%
Buddhism	
?
0.5%
Rodnovery and other native faiths	
?
1.2%
Spiritual but not religious	
?
25.2%
Atheism and irreligion	
?
13%
Other and undeclared	
?
6.1%

Ivan Eggink's painting represents Vladimir listening to the Orthodox priests, while the papal envoy stands aside in discontent

The Baptism of Vladimir, a fresco by Viktor Vasnetsov
Russians have practised Orthodox Christianity since the 10th century. According to the historical traditions of the Orthodox Church, Christianity was first brought to the territory of modern Belarus, Russia and Ukraine by Saint Andrew, the first Apostle of Jesus Christ.[322] Following the Primary Chronicle, the definitive Christianization of Kievan Rus' dates from the year 988 (the year is disputed[323]), when Vladimir the Great was baptized in Chersonesus and proceeded to baptize his family and people in Kiev. The latter events are traditionally referred to as the "baptism of Rus'" (Russian: ???????? ????, Ukrainian: ???????? ????) in Russian and Ukrainian literature. Much of the Russian population, like other Slavic peoples, preserved for centuries a double belief (dvoeverie) in both indigenous religion and Orthodox Christianity.

At the time of the 1917 Revolution, the Russian Orthodox Church was deeply integrated into the autocratic state, enjoying official status. This was a significant factor that contributed to the Bolshevik attitude to religion and the steps they took to control it. Bolsheviks consisted of many people with non-Russian, Communist Russians and influential Jewish backgrounds such as Vladimir Lenin, Leon Trotsky, Grigory Zinoviev, Lev Kamenev, Grigori Sokolnikov who were indifferent towards Christianity and based on the writings of Jewish philosopher Karl Marx with Marxism–Leninism as an ideology went on to form the Communist party.[324]

Thus the USSR became one of the first communist states to proclaim, as an ideological objective, the elimination of religion[325] and its replacement with universal atheism.[326][327] The communist government ridiculed religions and their believers, and propagated atheism in schools.[328] The confiscation of religious assets was often based on accusations of illegal accumulation of wealth.

State atheism in the Soviet Union was known in Russian as gosateizm,[325] and was based on the ideology of Marxism–Leninism. Marxist–Leninist Atheism has consistently advocated the control, suppression, and elimination of religion. Within about a year of the revolution, the state expropriated all church property, including the churches themselves, and in the period from 1922 to 1926, 28 Russian Orthodox bishops and more than 1,200 priests were killed. Many more were persecuted.[329] After the collapse of the Soviet Union there has been a renewal of religions in Russia, and among Slavs various movements have emerged besides Christianity, including Rodnovery (Slavic Native Faith), Ringing Cedars' Anastasianism, Hinduism,[330] Siberian shamanism[331] and other religions.

Currently, there is no official census of religion in Russia, and estimates are based on surveys only. In 2012 the research organization Sreda published Arena Atlas, a detailed enumeration of religious populations and nationalities in Russia, based on a large-sample country-wide survey. They found that 46.8% of Russians declared themselves Christians (including 41% Russian Orthodox, 1.5% simply Orthodox or members of non-Russian Orthodox churches, 4.1% unaffiliated Christians, and less than 1% for both Catholic and Protestant), while 25% were spiritual but not religious, 13% were atheists, 6.5% were Muslims, 1.2% were followers of "traditional religions honoring gods and ancestors" (including Rodnovery, Tengrism and other ethnic religions), and 0.5% were Tibetan Buddhists. However, later that year, the Levada Center estimated that 76% of Russians were Christians,[332] and in June 2013, the Public Opinion Foundation[333] estimated that 65% of the population was Christian. These findings are in line with Pew Research Center's 2011 estimate that 73.6% of Russians were Christians,[334] with Russian Public Opinion Research Center (VCIOM)'s 2010 survey (~77% Christian),[335] and with Ipsos MORI's 2011 survey (69%).[336]

The most recent Pew Research Center finding was that in 2015 71% of the population of Russia declared itself Eastern Orthodox, 15% religiously unaffiliated—a category which includes atheists, agnostics and those who describe their religion as “nothing in particular”, 10% Muslim, and 2% other Christians, while 1% belonged to other faiths.[337] The religiously unaffiliated divided between 4% as atheists, 1% as agnostics and 10% as nothing in particular.[338] The study cited that during the communist era the government repression of religion was widespread, and due to the Soviet anti-religious legislation; in 1991 37% of the population of Russia was Eastern Orthodox. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union the affiliation to the Eastern Orthodox church have risen substantially and in 2015 about 71% of the population of Russia declared itself to be Eastern Orthodox, and the share of who identitied as religiously unaffiliated declined from a 61% in 1991 to 18% in 2008.[339]


Procession of Tsar Alexander II into Dormition Cathedral in Moscow during his coronation in 1856
Orthodox Christianity, Islam, Judaism, Buddhism, and ethnic religions are recognised as Russia's traditional religions, marking the country's "historical heritage".[340]

Traced back to the Christianization of Kievan Rus' in the 10th century, Russian Orthodoxy is the dominant religion in the country; smaller Christian denominations such as Catholics, Armenian Gregorians and various Protestant churches also exist. The Russian Orthodox Church was the country's state religion prior to the Revolution and remains the largest religious body in the country. An estimated 95% of the registered Orthodox parishes belong to the Russian Orthodox Church while there are a number of smaller Orthodox churches.[341] However, the vast majority of Orthodox believers do not attend church on a regular basis. Easter is the most popular religious holiday in Russia, celebrated by a large segment of the Russian population, including large numbers of those who are non-religious. More than three-quarters of the Russian population celebrate Easter by making traditional Easter cakes, coloured eggs and paskha.[342]


Trinity Lavra of St. Sergius, spiritual centre of the Russian Orthodox Church
Islam is the second largest religion in Russia after Russian Orthodoxy.[343] It is the traditional or predominant religion amongst some Caucasian ethnicities (notably the Chechens, the Ingush and the Circassians), and amongst some Turkic peoples (notably the Tatars and the Bashkirs).

Buddhism is traditional in three regions of the Russian Federation: Buryatia, Tuva, and Kalmykia. According to various reports, the proportion of not religious people in Russia is between 16% and 48% of the population.[344] According to recent studies, the proportion of atheists has significantly decreased over the decades after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.[345][346]

In cultural and social affairs Vladimir Putin has collaborated closely with the Russian Orthodox Church. Patriarch Kirill of Moscow, head of the Church, endorsed his election in 2012. Steven Myers reports, "The church, once heavily repressed, had emerged from the Soviet collapse as one of the most respected institutions... Now Kiril led the faithful directly into an alliance with the state."[347] Mark Woods provides specific examples of how the Church under Patriarch Kirill of Moscow has backed the expansion of Russian power into Crimea and eastern Ukraine.[348] More broadly the New York Times reports in September 2016 how that Church's policy prescriptions support the Kremlin's appeal to social conservatives:

A fervent foe of homosexuality and any attempt to put individual rights above those of family, community or nation, the Russian Orthodox Church helps project Russia as the natural ally of all those who pine for a more secure, illiberal world free from the tradition-crushing rush of globalization, multiculturalism and women's and gay rights.[349]
On April 26, 2017, for the first time, The U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom classified Russia as one of the world's worst violators of religious liberty, recommending in its 2017 annual report that the U.S. government deem Russia a "country of particular concern" under the International Religious Freedom Act and negotiate for religious liberty. The report states, "—it is the sole state to have not only continually intensified its repression of religious freedom since USCIRF commenced monitoring it, but also to have expanded its repressive policies....ranging from administrative harassment to arbitrary imprisonment to extrajudicial killing, are implemented in a fashion that is systematic, ongoing, and egregious."[350] On April 4,2017 UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and Expression David Kaye, UN Special Rapporteur on Freedoms of Peaceful Assembly and Association Maina Kiai, and UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion and Belief Ahmed Shaheed condemned Russia's treatment of Jehovah's Witnesses.[351] Many other countries and international organizations have spoken out on Russia's religious abuses.[352][353]


Saint Basil's Cathedral, Moscow.

 

Moscow Cathedral Mosque.

 

Rodnover worshippers at the wooden temple of the Slavic Kremlin, Podolsky District, Moscow Oblast.

 

A dom archi (??? ????) or archi djete (???? ??????), a Tengrist church in Yakutsk, Yakutia.

 

Atsaysky datsan (Buddhist monastery) in Buryatia.

 

Image of the 14th Dalai Lama at the Ustuu-Huree Buddhist monastery in Tuva.

 

Stupa of Shad Tchup Ling, a Slavic Buddhist monastery in Kachkanar, Sverdlovsk Oblast.

 

Followers of Anastasianism (Ringing Cedars) celebrating Ivan Kupala in Belgorod Oblast.

 

Tuvan shamaness Ai-Churek (Moon Heart) performing a fire rite in Kyzyl, Tuva.

 

Russian Hindus celebrating Ratha Yatra in Moscow Oblast.

 

Syncretic Temple of All Religions in Kazan, Tatarstan.

Health
Main article: Healthcare in Russia

A mobile clinic used to provide health care at remote railway stations
The Russian Constitution guarantees free, universal health care for all its citizens.[354] In practice, however, free health care is partially restricted because of mandatory registration.[355] While Russia has more physicians, hospitals, and health care workers than almost any other country in the world on a per capita basis,[356] since the dissolution of the Soviet Union the health of the Russian population has declined considerably as a result of social, economic, and lifestyle changes;[357] the trend has been reversed only in the recent years, with average life expectancy having increased 5.2 years for males and 3.1 years for females between 2006 and 2014.[358]

Due to the ongoing Russian financial crisis since 2014, major cuts in health spending have resulted in a decline in the quality of service of the state healthcare system. About 40% of basic medical facilities have fewer staff than they are supposed to have, with others being closed down. Waiting times for treatment have increased, and patients have been forced to pay for more services that were previously free.[359][360]

As of 2014, the average life expectancy in Russia was 65.29 years for males and 76.49 years for females.[358] The biggest factor contributing to the relatively low life expectancy for males is a high mortality rate among working-age males. Deaths mostly occur from preventable causes, including alcohol poisoning, smoking, traffic accidents and violent crime.[268] As a result, Russia has one of the world's most female-biased sex ratios, with 0.859 males to every female.[106]

Education
Main article: Education in Russia

Moscow State University
Russia has the most college-level or higher graduates in terms of percentage of population in the world, at 54%.[361] Russia has a free education system, which is guaranteed for all citizens by the Constitution,[362] however entry to subsidized higher education is highly competitive.[363] As a result of great emphasis on science and technology in education, Russian medical, mathematical, scientific, and aerospace research is generally of a high order.[364]

Since 1990, the 11-year school education has been introduced. Education in state-owned secondary schools is free. University level education is free, with exceptions. A substantial share of students is enrolled for full pay (many state institutions started to open commercial positions in the last years).[365]

The oldest and largest Russian universities are Moscow State University and Saint Petersburg State University. In the 2000s, in order to create higher education and research institutions of comparable scale in Russian regions, the government launched a program of establishing "federal universities", mostly by merging existing large regional universities and research institutes and providing them with a special funding. These new institutions include the Southern Federal University, Siberian Federal University, Kazan Volga Federal University, North-Eastern Federal University, and Far Eastern Federal University.

According to the 2018 QS World University Rankings, the highest-ranking Russian educational institution is Moscow State University, rated 95th in the world.

Culture
Main article: Russian culture
Folk culture and cuisine
See also: Russian traditions, Russian jokes, Russian fairy tales, and Russian cuisine

The Merchant's Wife by Boris Kustodiev, showcasing the Russian tea culture
There are over 160 different ethnic groups and indigenous peoples in Russia.[264] The country's vast cultural diversity spans ethnic Russians with their Slavic Orthodox traditions, Tatars and Bashkirs with their Turkic Muslim culture, Buddhist nomadic Buryats and Kalmyks, Shamanistic peoples of the Extreme North and Siberia, highlanders of the Northern Caucasus, and Finno-Ugric peoples of the Russian North West and Volga Region.

Handicraft, like Dymkovo toy, khokhloma, gzhel and palekh miniature represent an important aspect of Russian folk culture. Ethnic Russian clothes include kaftan, kosovorotka and ushanka for men, sarafan and kokoshnik for women, with lapti and valenki as common shoes. The clothes of Cossacks from Southern Russia include burka and papaha, which they share with the peoples of the Northern Caucasus.

Russian cuisine widely uses fish, poultry, mushrooms, berries, and honey. Crops of rye, wheat, barley, and millet provide the ingredients for various breads, pancakes and cereals, as well as for kvass, beer and vodka drinks. Black bread is rather popular in Russia, compared to the rest of the world. Flavourful soups and stews include shchi, borsch, ukha, solyanka and okroshka. Smetana (a heavy sour cream) is often added to soups and salads. Pirozhki, blini and syrniki are native types of pancakes. Chicken Kiev, pelmeni and shashlyk are popular meat dishes, the last two being of Tatar and Caucasus origin respectively. Other meat dishes include stuffed cabbage rolls (golubtsy) usually filled with meat.[366] Salads include Olivier salad, vinegret and dressed herring.

Russia's large number of ethnic groups have distinctive traditions regarding folk music. Typical ethnic Russian musical instruments are gusli, balalaika, zhaleika, and garmoshka. Folk music had a significant influence on Russian classical composers, and in modern times it is a source of inspiration for a number of popular folk bands, like Melnitsa. Russian folk songs, as well as patriotic Soviet songs, constitute the bulk of the repertoire of the world-renowned Red Army choir and other popular ensembles.

Russians have many traditions, including the washing in banya, a hot steam bath somewhat similar to sauna.[56] Old Russian folklore takes its roots in the pagan Slavic religion. Many Russian fairy tales and epic bylinas were adapted for animation films, or for feature movies by the prominent directors like Aleksandr Ptushko (Ilya Muromets, Sadko) and Aleksandr Rou (Morozko, Vasilisa the Beautiful). Russian poets, including Pyotr Yershov and Leonid Filatov, made a number of well-known poetical interpretations of the classical fairy tales, and in some cases, like that of Alexander Pushkin, also created fully original fairy tale poems of great popularity.

Architecture
Main articles: Russian architecture and List of Russian architects

Stroganov Church in Nizhny Novgorod, a well known piece of Russian architecture

Brick khrushchovka in Tomsk
Since the Christianization of Kievan Rus' for several ages Russian architecture was influenced predominantly by the Byzantine architecture. Apart from fortifications (kremlins), the main stone buildings of ancient Rus' were Orthodox churches with their many domes, often gilded or brightly painted.

Aristotle Fioravanti and other Italian architects brought Renaissance trends into Russia since the late 15th century, while the 16th century saw the development of unique tent-like churches culminating in Saint Basil's Cathedral.[367] By that time the onion dome design was also fully developed.[368] In the 17th century, the "fiery style" of ornamentation flourished in Moscow and Yaroslavl, gradually paving the way for the Naryshkin baroque of the 1690s. After the reforms of Peter the Great the change of architectural styles in Russia generally followed that in the Western Europe.

The 18th-century taste for rococo architecture led to the ornate works of Bartolomeo Rastrelli and his followers. The reigns of Catherine the Great and her grandson Alexander I saw the flourishing of Neoclassical architecture, most notably in the capital city of Saint Petersburg. The second half of the 19th century was dominated by the Neo-Byzantine and Russian Revival styles. Prevalent styles of the 20th century were the Art Nouveau, Constructivism, and the Stalin Empire style.

With the change in values imposed by communist ideology, the tradition of preservation was broken. Independent preservation societies, even those that defended only secular landmarks such as Moscow-based OIRU were disbanded by the end of the 1920s. A new anti-religious campaign, launched in 1929, coincided with collectivization of peasants; destruction of churches in the cities peaked around 1932. A number of churches were demolished, including the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour in Moscow. In Moscow alone losses of 1917–2006 are estimated at over 640 notable buildings (including 150 to 200 listed buildings, out of a total inventory of 3,500) – some disappeared completely, others were replaced with concrete replicas.

In 1955, a new Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, condemned the "excesses" of the former academic architecture,[369] and the late Soviet era was dominated by plain functionalism in architecture. This helped somewhat to resolve the housing problem, but created a large quantity of buildings of low architectural quality, much in contrast with the previous bright styles. In 1959 Nikita Khrushchev launched his anti-religious campaign. By 1964 over 10 thousand churches out of 20 thousand were shut down (mostly in rural areas) and many were demolished. Of 58 monasteries and convents operating in 1959, only sixteen remained by 1964; of Moscow's fifty churches operating in 1959, thirty were closed and six demolished.

Visual arts
Main article: Russian artists

A piece of Russian icon art known as Rublev's Trinity

Karl Bryullov (1799–1852), a key figure in transition from the Russian neoclassicism to romanticism.
Early Russian painting is represented in icons and vibrant frescos, the two genres inherited from Byzantium. As Moscow rose to power, Theophanes the Greek, Dionisius and Andrei Rublev became vital names associated with a distinctly Russian art.

The Russian Academy of Arts was created in 1757[370] and gave Russian artists an international role and status. Ivan Argunov, Dmitry Levitzky, Vladimir Borovikovsky and other 18th century academicians mostly focused on portrait painting. In the early 19th century, when neoclassicism and romantism flourished, mythological and Biblical themes inspired many prominent paintings, notably by Karl Briullov and Alexander Ivanov.

In the mid-19th century the Peredvizhniki (Wanderers) group of artists broke with the Academy and initiated a school of art liberated from academic restrictions.[371] These were mostly realist painters who captured Russian identity in landscapes of wide rivers, forests, and birch clearings, as well as vigorous genre scenes and robust portraits of their contemporaries. Some artists focused on depicting dramatic moments in Russian history, while others turned to social criticism, showing the conditions of the poor and caricaturing authority; critical realism flourished under the reign of Alexander II. Leading realists include Ivan Shishkin, Arkhip Kuindzhi, Ivan Kramskoi, Vasily Polenov, Isaac Levitan, Vasily Surikov, Viktor Vasnetsov, Ilya Repin, and Boris Kustodiev.

The turn of the 20th century saw the rise of symbolist painting, represented by Mikhail Vrubel, Kuzma Petrov-Vodkin, and Nicholas Roerich.

The Russian avant-garde was a large, influential wave of modernist art that flourished in Russia from approximately 1890 to 1930. The term covers many separate, but inextricably related art movements that occurred at the time, namely neo-primitivism, suprematism, constructivism, rayonism, and Russian Futurism. Notable artists from this era include El Lissitzky, Kazimir Malevich, Wassily Kandinsky, and Marc Chagall. Since the 1930s the revolutionary ideas of the avant-garde clashed with the newly emerged conservative direction of socialist realism.

Soviet art produced works that were furiously patriotic and anti-fascist during and after the Great Patriotic War. Multiple war memorials, marked by a great restrained solemnity, were built throughout the country. Soviet artists often combined innovation with socialist realism, notably the sculptors Vera Mukhina, Yevgeny Vuchetich and Ernst Neizvestny.

Music and dance
Main articles: Music of Russia, Russian ballet, Russian opera, Russian rock, Russian pop, and Russian composers

The Snowdance scene from The Nutcracker ballet, composed by Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky
Music in 19th century Russia was defined by the tension between classical composer Mikhail Glinka along with other members of The Mighty Handful, who embraced Russian national identity and added religious and folk elements to their compositions, and the Russian Musical Society led by composers Anton and Nikolay Rubinsteins, which was musically conservative. The later tradition of Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, one of the greatest composers of the Romantic era, was continued into the 20th century by Sergei Rachmaninoff.[372] World-renowned composers of the 20th century include Alexander Scriabin, Igor Stravinsky, Sergei Prokofiev, Dmitri Shostakovich and Alfred Schnittke.

Russian conservatories have turned out generations of famous soloists. Among the best known are violinists Jascha Heifetz, David Oistrakh, Leonid Kogan, Gidon Kremer, and Maxim Vengerov; cellists Mstislav Rostropovich, Natalia Gutman; pianists Vladimir Horowitz, Sviatoslav Richter, Emil Gilels, Vladimir Sofronitsky and Evgeny Kissin; and vocalists Fyodor Shalyapin, Mark Reizen, Elena Obraztsova, Tamara Sinyavskaya, Nina Dorliak, Galina Vishnevskaya, Anna Netrebko and Dmitry Hvorostovsky.[373]

During the early 20th century, Russian ballet dancers Anna Pavlova and Vaslav Nijinsky rose to fame, and impresario Sergei Diaghilev and his Ballets Russes' travels abroad profoundly influenced the development of dance worldwide.[374] Soviet ballet preserved the perfected 19th century traditions,[375] and the Soviet Union's choreography schools produced many internationally famous stars, including Galina Ulanova, Maya Plisetskaya, Rudolf Nureyev, and Mikhail Baryshnikov. The Bolshoi Ballet in Moscow and the Mariinsky Ballet in St Petersburg remain famous throughout the world.[376]

Modern Russian rock music takes its roots both in the Western rock and roll and heavy metal, and in traditions of the Russian bards of the Soviet era, such as Vladimir Vysotsky and Bulat Okudzhava.[377] Popular Russian rock groups include Mashina Vremeni, DDT, Aquarium, Alisa, Kino, Kipelov, Nautilus Pompilius, Aria, Grazhdanskaya Oborona, Splean and Korol i Shut. Russian pop music developed from what was known in the Soviet times as estrada into full-fledged industry, with some performers gaining wide international recognition, such as t.A.T.u., Nu Virgos and Vitas.

Literature and philosophy
Main articles: Russian literature, Russian philosophy, Russian poets, Russian playwrights, Russian novelists, and Russian science fiction and fantasy

Leo Tolstoy, novelist and philosopher
In the 18th century, during the era of Russian Enlightenment, the development of Russian literature was boosted by the works of Mikhail Lomonosov and Denis Fonvizin. By the early 19th century a modern native tradition had emerged, producing some of the greatest writers in Russian history. This period, known also as the Golden Age of Russian Poetry, began with Alexander Pushkin, who is considered the founder of the modern Russian literary language and often described as the "Russian Shakespeare".[378] It continued into the 19th century with the poetry of Mikhail Lermontov and Nikolay Nekrasov, dramas of Alexander Ostrovsky and Anton Chekhov, and the prose of Nikolai Gogol and Ivan Turgenev. Leo Tolstoy and Fyodor Dostoyevsky have been described by literary critics as the greatest novelists of all time.[379][380]

By the 1880s, the age of the great novelists was over, and short fiction and poetry became the dominant genres. The next several decades became known as the Silver Age of Russian Poetry, when the previously dominant literary realism was replaced by symbolism. Leading authors of this era include such poets as Valery Bryusov, Vyacheslav Ivanov, Alexander Blok, Nikolay Gumilev and Anna Akhmatova, and novelists Leonid Andreyev, Ivan Bunin, and Maxim Gorky.

Russian philosophy blossomed in the 19th century, when it was defined initially by the opposition of Westernizers, who advocated Western political and economical models, and Slavophiles, who insisted on developing Russia as a unique civilization. The latter group includes Nikolai Danilevsky and Konstantin Leontiev, the founders of eurasianism. In its further development Russian philosophy was always marked by a deep connection to literature and interest in creativity, society, politics and nationalism; Russian cosmism and religious philosophy were other major areas. Notable philosophers of the late 19th and the early 20th centuries include Vladimir Solovyev, Sergei Bulgakov, and Vladimir Vernadsky.


Alexander Pushkin
Following the Russian Revolution of 1917 many prominent writers and philosophers left the country, including Bunin, Vladimir Nabokov and Nikolay Berdyayev, while a new generation of talented authors joined together in an effort to create a distinctive working-class culture appropriate for the new Soviet state. In the 1930s censorship over literature was tightened in line with the policy of socialist realism. In the late 1950s restrictions on literature were eased, and by the 1970s and 1980s, writers were increasingly ignoring official guidelines. Leading authors of the Soviet era include novelists Yevgeny Zamyatin (emigrated), Ilf and Petrov, Mikhail Bulgakov (censored) and Mikhail Sholokhov, and poets Vladimir Mayakovsky, Yevgeny Yevtushenko, and Andrey Voznesensky.

The Soviet Union was also a major producer of science fiction, written by authors like Arkady and Boris Strugatsky, Kir Bulychov, Alexander Belayev and Ivan Yefremov.[381] Traditions of Russian science fiction and fantasy are continued today by numerous writers.

Cinema, animation and media
Main articles: Cinema of Russia, Russian animation, Television in Russia, and Media of Russia

Former Russian President Dmitry Medvedev in the Washington studio of Russia Today TV with Margarita Simonyan
Russian and later Soviet cinema was a hotbed of invention in the period immediately following 1917, resulting in world-renowned films such as The Battleship Potemkin by Sergei Eisenstein.[382] Eisenstein was a student of filmmaker and theorist Lev Kuleshov, who developed the Soviet montage theory of film editing at the world's first film school, the All-Union Institute of Cinematography. Dziga Vertov, whose kino-glaz ("film-eye") theory—that the camera, like the human eye, is best used to explore real life—had a huge impact on the development of documentary film making and cinema realism. The subsequent state policy of socialist realism somewhat limited creativity; however, many Soviet films in this style were artistically successful, including Chapaev, The Cranes Are Flying, and Ballad of a Soldier.[382]

The 1960s and 1970s saw a greater variety of artistic styles in Soviet cinema. Eldar Ryazanov's and Leonid Gaidai's comedies of that time were immensely popular, with many of the catch phrases still in use today. In 1961–68 Sergey Bondarchuk directed an Oscar-winning film adaptation of Leo Tolstoy's epic War and Peace, which was the most expensive film made in the Soviet Union.[383] In 1969, Vladimir Motyl's White Sun of the Desert was released, a very popular film in a genre of ostern; the film is traditionally watched by cosmonauts before any trip into space.[384]


Shukhov Tower on the Oka River served early radio and TV broadcasting.
Russian animation dates back to late Russian Empire times. During the Soviet era, Soyuzmultfilm studio was the largest animation producer. Soviet animators developed a great variety of pioneering techniques and aesthetic styles, with prominent directors including Ivan Ivanov-Vano, Fyodor Khitruk and Aleksandr Tatarsky. Many Soviet cartoon heroes such as the Russian-style Winnie-the-Pooh, cute little Cheburashka, Wolf and Hare from Nu, Pogodi!, are iconic images in Russia and many surrounding countries.

The late 1980s and 1990s were a period of crisis in Russian cinema and animation. Although Russian filmmakers became free to express themselves, state subsidies were drastically reduced, resulting in fewer films produced. The early years of the 21st century have brought increased viewership and subsequent prosperity to the industry on the back of the economic revival. Production levels are already higher than in Britain and Germany.[385] Russia's total box-office revenue in 2007 was $565 million, up 37% from the previous year.[386] In 2002 the Russian Ark became the first feature film ever to be shot in a single take. The traditions of Soviet animation were developed recently by such directors as Aleksandr Petrov and studios like Melnitsa Animation.

While there were few stations or channels in the Soviet time, in the past two decades many new state and privately owned radio stations and TV channels have appeared. In 2005 a state-run English language Russia Today TV started broadcasting, and its Arabic version Rusiya Al-Yaum was launched in 2007. Censorship and Media freedom in Russia has always been a main theme of Russian media.

Sports
Main article: Sport in Russia

The Russia national football team at UEFA Euro 2012
Soviet and later Russian athletes have always been in the top four for the number of gold medals collected at the Summer Olympics. Soviet gymnasts, track-and-field athletes, weightlifters, wrestlers, boxers, fencers, shooters, cross country skiers, biathletes, speed skaters and figure skaters were consistently among the best in the world, along with Soviet basketball, handball, volleyball and ice hockey players.[387] The 1980 Summer Olympics were held in Moscow while the 2014 Winter Olympics were hosted in Sochi.

See also: Doping in Russia
Russia has the most Olympic medals stripped for doping violations (51), the most of any country, four times the number of the runner-up, and more than a third of the global total, and 129 athletes caught doping at the Olympics, also the most of any country. From 2011 to 2015, more than a thousand Russian competitors in various sports, including summer, winter, and Paralympic sports, benefited from a state-sponsored cover-up,[388][389][390][391][392] with no indication that the program has ceased since then.[393]


KHL finals, the league is considered to be the second-best in the world
Although ice hockey was only introduced during the Soviet era, the Soviet Union national team managed to win gold at almost all the Olympics and World Championships they contested. Russian players Valery Kharlamov, Sergei Makarov, Vyacheslav Fetisov and Vladislav Tretiak hold four of six positions in the IIHF Team of the Century.[394] Russia has not won the Olympic ice hockey tournament since the Unified Team won gold in 1992. Russia won the 1993, 2008, 2009,[395] 2012 and the 2014 IIHF World Championships.

The Kontinental Hockey League (KHL) was founded in 2008 as a successor to the Russian Superleague. It is ranked the top hockey league in Europe as of 2009,[396] and the second-best in the world.[397] It is an international professional ice hockey league in Eurasia and consists of 29 teams, of which 21 are based in Russia and 7 more are located in Latvia, Kazakhstan, Belarus, Finland, Slovakia, Croatia and China. KHL is on the 4th place by attendance in Europe.[398]

Bandy, also known as Russian hockey, is another traditionally popular ice sport.[399] The Soviet Union won all the Bandy World Championships for men between 1957–79[400] and some thereafter too. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Russia has continuously been one of the most successful teams, winning many world championships.


Dmitry Medvedev with the Russia men's national ice hockey team

Opening of the 2014 Winter Olympics
Association football is one of the most popular sports in modern Russia. The Soviet national team became the first European Champions by winning Euro 1960. Appearing in four FIFA World Cups from 1958 to 1970, Lev Yashin is regarded as one of the greatest goalkeepers in the history of football, and was chosen on the FIFA World Cup Dream Team.[401] The Soviet national team reached the finals of Euro 1988. In 1956 and 1988, the Soviet Union won gold at the Olympic football tournament. Russian clubs CSKA Moscow and Zenit St Petersburg won the UEFA Cup in 2005 and 2008. The Russian national football team reached the semi-finals of Euro 2008, losing only to the eventual champions Spain. Russia will host the 2018 FIFA World Cup, with 11 host cities located in the European part of the country and in the Ural region.[402]

In 2007, the Russian national basketball team won the European Basketball Championship. The Russian basketball club PBC CSKA Moscow is one of the top teams in Europe, winning the Euroleague in 2006 and 2008.

Larisa Latynina, who currently holds the record for the most gold Olympic medals won by a woman, established the USSR as the dominant force in gymnastics for many years.[403] Today, Russia is the leading nation in rhythmic gymnastics with Yevgeniya Kanayeva. Double 50m and 100m freestyle Olympic gold medalist Alexander Popov is widely considered the greatest sprint swimmer in history.[404] Russian synchronized swimming is the best in the world, with almost all gold medals at Olympics and World Championships having been swept by Russians in recent decades. Figure skating is another popular sport in Russia, especially pair skating and ice dancing. With the exception of 2010 a Soviet or Russian pair has won gold at every Winter Olympics since 1964.

Since the end of the Soviet era, tennis has grown in popularity and Russia has produced a number of famous players, including Maria Sharapova. In martial arts, Russia produced the sport Sambo and renowned fighters, like Fedor Emelianenko. Chess is a widely popular pastime in Russia; from 1927, Russian grandmasters have held the world chess championship almost continuously.[405]

The 2014 Winter Olympics were held in Sochi in the south of Russia. In 2016 the McLaren Report found evidence of widespread state-sponsored doping and an institutional conspiracy to cover up Russian competitors' positive drug tests.[406] As of December 1, 2017 25 athletes are disqualified, 11 medals are stripped.

Formula One is also becoming increasingly popular in Russia. In 2010 Vitaly Petrov of Vyborg became the first Russian to drive in Formula One, and was soon followed by a second – Daniil Kvyat, from Ufa – in 2014. There had only been two Russian Grands Prix (in 1913 and 1914), but the Russian Grand Prix returned as part of the Formula One season in 2014, as part of a six-year deal.[407]

Russia will host the 2018 FIFA World Cup, this will be the first World Cup ever held in Eastern Europe, and the first held in Europe since 2006.

National holidays and symbols
Main articles: Public holidays in Russia and Cultural icons of Russia

Scarlet Sails celebration on the Neva river in Saint Petersburg
There are seven public holidays in Russia,[408] except those always celebrated on Sunday. Russian New Year traditions resemble those of the Western Christmas, with New Year Trees and gifts, and Ded Moroz (Father Frost) playing the same role as Santa Claus. Orthodox Christmas falls on January 7, because the Russian Orthodox Church still follows the Julian calendar, and all Orthodox holidays are 13 days after Western ones. Two other major Christian holidays are Easter and Trinity Sunday. Kurban Bayram and Uraza Bayram are celebrated by Russian Muslims.

Further Russian public holidays include Defender of the Fatherland Day (February 23), which honors Russian men, especially those serving in the army; International Women's Day (March 8), which combines the traditions of Mother's Day and Valentine's Day; Spring and Labor Day (May 1); Victory Day; Russia Day (June 12); and Unity Day (November 4), commemorating the popular uprising which expelled the Polish occupation force from Moscow in 1612.

Victory Day is the second most popular holiday in Russia; it commemorates the victory over Nazism in the Great Patriotic War. A huge military parade, hosted by the President of Russia, is annually organised in Moscow on Red Square. Similar parades take place in all major Russian cities and cities with the status Hero city or City of Military Glory.

Popular non-public holidays include Old New Year (the New Year according to the Julian Calendar on January 14), Tatiana Day (students holiday on January 25), Maslenitsa (a pre-Christian spring holiday a week before the Great Lent), Cosmonautics Day (in tribute to the first human trip into space), Ivan Kupala Day (another pre-Christian holiday on July 7) and Peter and Fevronia Day (which takes place on July 8 and is the Russian analogue of Valentine's Day, focusing, however, on family love and fidelity).


Matryoshka doll taken apart
State symbols of Russia include the Byzantine double-headed eagle, combined with St. George of Moscow in the Russian coat of arms. The Russian flag dates from the late Tsardom of Russia period and has been widely used since the time of the Russian Empire. The Russian anthem shares its music with the Soviet Anthem, though not the lyrics. The imperial motto God is with us and the Soviet motto Proletarians of all countries, unite! are now obsolete and no new motto has replaced them. The hammer and sickle and the full Soviet coat of arms are still widely seen in Russian cities as a part of old architectural decorations. The Soviet Red Stars are also encountered, often on military equipment and war memorials. The Red Banner continues to be honored, especially the Banner of Victory of 1945.

The Matryoshka doll is a recognizable symbol of Russia, and the towers of Moscow Kremlin and Saint Basil's Cathedral in Moscow are Russia's main architectural icons. Cheburashka is a mascot of the Russian national Olympic team. St. Mary, St. Nicholas, St. Andrew, St. George, St. Alexander Nevsky, St. Sergius of Radonezh and St. Seraphim of Sarov are Russia's patron saints. Chamomile is the national flower, while birch is the national tree. The Russian bear is an animal symbol and a national personification of Russia, though this image has a Western origin and Russians themselves have accepted it only fairly recently. The native Russian national personification is Mother Russia.

Tourism
Main article: Tourism in Russia

Grand Cascade in Peterhof, a popular tourist destination in Saint Petersburg
Tourism in Russia has seen rapid growth since the late Soviet period, first domestic tourism and then international tourism, fueled by the rich cultural heritage and great natural variety of the country. Major tourist routes in Russia include a journey around the Golden Ring of ancient cities, cruises on the big rivers like the Volga, and long journeys on the famous Trans-Siberian Railway. In 2013, Russia was visited by 28.4 million tourists; it is the ninth most visited country in the world and the seventh most visited in Europe.[409] The number of Western visitors dropped in 2014.[410]


The Motherland Calls in Volgograd is the tallest statue of a woman in the world (not including pedestals)
The most visited destinations in Russia are Moscow and Saint Petersburg, the current and former capitals of the country. Recognized as World Cities, they feature such world-renowned museums as the Tretyakov Gallery and the Hermitage, famous theaters like Bolshoi and Mariinsky, ornate churches like Saint Basil's Cathedral, Cathedral of Christ the Saviour, Saint Isaac's Cathedral and Church of the Savior on Blood, impressive fortifications like the Kremlin and Peter and Paul Fortress, beautiful squares and streets like Red Square, Palace Square, Tverskaya Street, Nevsky Prospect, and Arbat Street. Rich palaces and parks are found in the former imperial residences in suburbs of Moscow (Kolomenskoye, Tsaritsyno) and St Petersburg (Peterhof, Strelna, Oranienbaum, Gatchina, Pavlovsk and Tsarskoye Selo). Moscow displays Soviet architecture at its best, along with modern skyscrapers, while St Petersburg, nicknamed Venice of the North, boasts of its classical architecture, many rivers, canals and bridges.

Kazan, the capital of Tatarstan, shows a mix of Christian Russian and Muslim Tatar cultures. The city has registered a brand The Third Capital of Russia, though a number of other major cities compete for this status, including Novosibirsk, Yekaterinburg and Nizhny Novgorod.

The warm subtropical Black Sea coast of Russia is the site for a number of popular sea resorts, like Sochi, the follow-up host of the 2014 Winter Olympics. The mountains of the Northern Caucasus contain popular ski resorts such as Dombay. The most famous natural destination in Russia is Lake Baikal, the Blue Eye of Siberia. This unique lake, the oldest and deepest in the world, has crystal-clear waters and is surrounded by taiga-covered mountains. Other popular natural destinations include Kamchatka with its volcanoes and geysers, Karelia with its lakes and granite rocks, the snowy Altai Mountains, and the wild steppes of Tuva.

See also
flag	Russia portal
	Europe portal
Book icon	
Book: Russia
Outline of Russia
Consecration of Russia
Index of Soviet Union-related articles
References
^ Jump up to: a b c d "???-2010". perepis-2010.ru. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012.
Jump up ^ Wikisource:Constitution of Russia
Jump up ^ ???? ?????????? ?? "? ???????????? 1150-????? ?????????? ?????????? ?????????????????" [Presidential Decree "On celebrating the 1150th anniversary of Russian statehood"]. www.1150russia.ru (in Russian language). ??????? ???????? ???????????? ??????? (Novgorod Region Culture Committee). March 3, 2011. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2016.
Jump up ^ Matt Rosenberg. "Biggest Countries The Twenty Largest Countries in Area in the World". About.com. Retrieved October 20, 2016.
Jump up ^ "The Russian federation: general characteristics". Federal State Statistics Service. Archived from the original on July 28, 2011. Retrieved April 5, 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b ?????? ??????????? ????????? ?? 1 ?????? 2017 ???? ? ? ??????? ?? 2016 ??? [Population estimates as of January 1, 2017 and the average for 2016] (XLS). ??????????? ?????? ??????????????? ?????????? (Federal State Statistics Service) (in Russian language). Retrieved October 20, 2016.
^ Jump up to: a b When including the Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol, the total population of Russia rises to 146,804,372.[6]
^ Jump up to: a b c d "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects: Russia". IMF. June 2017.
Jump up ^ "GINI index (World Bank estimate)". World Bank. Retrieved November 2, 2017.
Jump up ^ "Human Development Report 2016 – "Human Development for everyone"" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2016. Retrieved March 21, 2017.
Jump up ^ Taylor, Adam (March 22, 2014). "Crimea has joined the ranks of the world's 'gray areas.' Here are the others on that list". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 27, 2014.
Jump up ^ "The names Russian Federation and Russia shall be equal". "The Constitution of the Russian Federation". (Article 1). Retrieved June 25, 2009.
^ Jump up to: a b "Russia". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved January 31, 2008.
Jump up ^ "General Information". Russian Embassy, Washington DC.
Jump up ^ "?????????? ? ????????? ?????????? ?????????". Archived from the original on April 16, 2016.
Jump up ^ "Russia".
Jump up ^ "??????? ? ??????????? ??????".
Jump up ^ ?????????? [Demography] (DOC). Russian Federal State Statistics Service (in Russian). 2016. Retrieved October 20, 2016.
Jump up ^ "Russia". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved January 31, 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b c Excerpted from Glenn E. Curtis (ed.) (1998). "Russia: A Country Study: Kievan Rus' and Mongol Periods". Washington, D.C.: Federal Research Division of the Library of Congress. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved July 20, 2007.
Jump up ^ Chaliand, Gérard (1967). Introduction. The Mongol Empire: Its Rise and Legacy. By Prawdin, Michael. Transaction Publishers. pp. 512–550. ISBN 141282897X.
Jump up ^ Rein Taagepera (1997). "Expansion and Contraction Patterns of Large Polities: Context for Russia". International Studies Quarterly. 41 (3): 475–504. doi:10.1111/0020-8833.00053.
Jump up ^ Peter Turchin; Thomas D. Hall; Jonathan M. Adams (2006). "East-West Orientation of Historical Empires" (PDF). Journal of World-Systems Research, Vol. 12 (no. 2). pp. 219–229. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 22, 2007.
Jump up ^ Jonathan R. Adelman; Cristann Lea Gibson (July 1, 1989). Contemporary Soviet Military Affairs: The Legacy of World War II. Unwin Hyman. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-04-445031-3. Retrieved June 15, 2012.
Jump up ^ Weinberg, G. L. (1995). A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II. Cambridge University Press. p. 264. ISBN 0-521-55879-4.
Jump up ^ Rozhnov, Konstantin, "Who won World War II?". BBC.
Jump up ^ GDP – Million 1990. CIA Factbook. 1991. Retrieved November 30, 2015.
Jump up ^ Scott and Scott (1979) p. 305
Jump up ^ "October 30, 1961 – The Tsar Bomba: CTBTO Preparatory Commission".
^ Jump up to: a b "Country Profile: Russia". Foreign & Commonwealth Office of the United Kingdom. Archived from the original on October 16, 2009. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects". IMF. Retrieved April 27, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Commission of the Russian Federation for UNESCO: Panorama of Russia". Unesco.ru. Retrieved October 29, 2010.
^ Jump up to: a b "International Energy Agency – Oil Market Report" (PDF). January 18, 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 18, 2012. Retrieved February 20, 2012.
^ Jump up to: a b "Country Comparison :: Natural gas – production", CIA World Factbook. Retrieved February 3, 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b "Status of Nuclear Powers and Their Nuclear Capabilities". Federation of American Scientists. March 2008. Retrieved March 19, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Online Etymology Dictionary". Etymonline.com. Retrieved November 2, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Rus – definition of Rus by the Free Online Dictionary, Thesaurus and Encyclopedia". Thefreedictionary.com. Retrieved November 2, 2011.
Jump up ^ Milner-Gulland, R. R. (1997). The Russians: The People of Europe. Blackwell Publishing. pp. 1–4. ISBN 0-631-21849-1. Retrieved December 15, 2016.
Jump up ^ "Definition of Russian". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved September 21, 2016.
Jump up ^ Belinskij A, Härke, H (1999). "The 'Princess' of Ipatovo". Archeology. 52 (2). Archived from the original on June 10, 2008. Retrieved December 26, 2007.
Jump up ^ Jacobson, E. (1995). The Art of the Scythians: The Interpenetration of Cultures at the Edge of the Hellenic World. Brill. p. 38. ISBN 90-04-09856-9.
Jump up ^ Tsetskhladze, G. R. (1998). The Greek Colonisation of the Black Sea Area: Historical Interpretation of Archaeology. F. Steiner. p. 48. ISBN 3-515-07302-7.
Jump up ^ Turchin, P. (2003). Historical Dynamics: Why States Rise and Fall. Princeton University Press. pp. 185–186. ISBN 0-691-11669-5.
Jump up ^ Christian, D. (1998). A History of Russia, Central Asia and Mongolia. Blackwell Publishing. pp. 286–288. ISBN 0-631-20814-3.
Jump up ^ For a discussion of the origins of Slavs, see Barford, P. M. (2001). The Early Slavs. Cornell University Press. pp. 15–16. ISBN 0-8014-3977-9.
Jump up ^ Christian, D. (1998). A History of Russia, Central Asia and Mongolia. Blackwell Publishing. pp. 6–7.
Jump up ^ Obolensky, D. (1994). Byzantium and the Slavs. St Vladimir's Seminary Press. p. 42. ISBN 0-88141-008-X.
Jump up ^ Thompson, J.W.; Johnson, E.N. (1937). An Introduction to Medieval Europe, 300–1500. W. W. Norton & Co. p. 268. ISBN 0-415-34699-1.
Jump up ^ "Ukraine: Security Assistance". U.S. Department of State. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ Klyuchevsky, V. (1987). The course of the Russian history. 1. Mysl'. ISBN 5-244-00072-1.
Jump up ^ Hamm, M.F. (1995). Kiev: A Portrait, 1800–1917. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-02585-1.
Jump up ^ "The Destruction of Kiev". Tspace.library.utoronto.ca. Archived from the original on April 27, 2011. Retrieved January 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ "History of Russia from Early Slavs history and Kievan Rus to Romanovs dynasty". Parallelsixty.com. Retrieved April 27, 2010.
Jump up ^ ???????, ?. ?. (1948). ??????? ??????? ????. pp. 525–533, 780–781.
^ Jump up to: a b "Black Death". Joseph Patrick Byrne (2004). p. 62. ISBN 0-313-32492-1
^ Jump up to: a b "The history of banya and sauna" (in Russian). Archived from the original on 2012-05-30.
Jump up ^ May, T. "Khanate of the Golden Horde". Archived from the original on June 7, 2008. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ Frank D. McConnell. Storytelling and Mythmaking: Images from Film and Literature. Oxford University Press, 1979. ISBN 0-19-502572-5; p. 78
Jump up ^ Solovyov, S. (2001). History of Russia from the Earliest Times. 6. AST. pp. 562–604. ISBN 5-17-002142-9.
Jump up ^ Skrynnikov, R. (1981). Ivan the Terrible. Academic Intl Pr. p. 219. ISBN 0-87569-039-4.
Jump up ^ Solovyov, S. (2001). History of Russia from the Earliest Times. 6. AST. pp. 751–908. ISBN 5-17-002142-9.
Jump up ^ Eizo Matsuki. "The Crimean Tatars and their Russian-Captive Slaves" (PDF). Mediterranean Studies Group at Hitotsubashi University. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 1, 2011. Retrieved May 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ Solovyov, S. (2001). History of Russia from the Earliest Times. 6. AST. pp. 751–809. ISBN 5-17-002142-9.
Jump up ^ Brian Glyn Williams (2013). "The Sultan's Raiders: The Military Role of the Crimean Tatars in the Ottoman Empire" (PDF). The Jamestown Foundation. p. 27. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 21, 2013.
Jump up ^ Borisenkov, E., Pasetski, V. The Thousand-Year Annals of the Extreme Meteorological Phenomena. p. 190. ISBN 5-244-00212-0.
Jump up ^ Solovyov, S. (2001). History of Russia from the Earliest Times. 7. AST. pp. 461–568. ISBN 5-17-002142-9.
Jump up ^ Solovyov, S. (2001). History of Russia from the Earliest Times. 9, ch.1. AST. ISBN 5-17-002142-9. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ Solovyov, S. (2001). History of Russia from the Earliest Times. 15, ch.1. AST.
Jump up ^ Timothy C. Dowling Russia at War: From the Mongol Conquest to Afghanistan, Chechnya, and Beyond pp 728–730 ABC-CLIO, December 2, 2014 ISBN 1598849484
Jump up ^ John F. Baddeley, "The Russian Conquest of the Caucasus", Longman, Green and Co., London: 1908. ISBN 978-0700706341 p. 90
Jump up ^ "Ruling the Empire". Library of Congress. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ Geoffrey A. Hosking (2001). "Russia and the Russians: a history". Harvard University Press. p. 9. ISBN 0-674-00473-6
Jump up ^ N. M. Dronin, E. G. Bellinger (2005). Climate dependence and food problems in Russia, 1900–1990: The interaction of climate and agricultural policy and their effect on food problems. Central European University Press. p. 38. ISBN 963-7326-10-3
Jump up ^ "????????????? ?????????? ??????????". ????????????? ?????????? ????? ?.?. ???????. February 7, 2017.
Jump up ^ Transactions of the American Philosophical Society. James E. Hassell (1991), p. 3. ISBN 0-87169-817-X
Jump up ^ Famine in Russia: the hidden horrors of 1921, International Committee of the Red Cross
Jump up ^ Abbott Gleason (2009). A Companion to Russian History. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 373. ISBN 1-4051-3560-3
^ Jump up to: a b Getty, Rittersporn, Zemskov. "Victims of the Soviet Penal System in the Pre-War Years: A First Approach on the Basis of Archival Evidence". The American Historical Review, Vol. 98, No. 4 (October 1993), pp. 1017–49.
Jump up ^ R. W. Davies, S. G. Wheatcroft (2004). The Years of Hunger: Soviet Agriculture, 1931–33, p. 401.
Jump up ^ Religion and the State in Russia and China: Suppression, Survival, and Revival, by Christopher Marsh, page 47. Continuum International Publishing Group, 2011.
Jump up ^ Inside Central Asia: A Political and Cultural History, by Dilip Hiro. Penguin, 2009.
Jump up ^ Adappur, Abraham (2000). Religion and the Cultural Crisis in India and the West. Intercultural Publications. ISBN 9788185574479. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Forced Conversion under Atheistic Regimes: It might be added that the most modern example of forced "conversions" came not from any theocratic state, but from a professedly atheist government — that of the Soviet Union under the Communists.
Jump up ^ Geoffrey Blainey; A Short History of Christianity; Viking; 2011; p.494"
Jump up ^ "World War II". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved March 9, 2008.
Jump up ^ "The Allies' first decisive successes: Stalingrad and the German retreat, summer 1942 – February 1943". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved March 12, 2008.
Jump up ^ The Legacy of the Siege of Leningrad, 1941–1995. Cambridge University Press.
Jump up ^ Brinkley, Douglas. The New York Times Living History: World War II, 1942–1945: The Allied Counteroffensive. Macmillan, 2004.
Jump up ^ Urquhart, Brian. Looking for the Sheriff. New York Review of Books, July 16, 1998.
Jump up ^ Erlikman, V. (2004). Poteri narodonaseleniia v XX veke : spravochnik. Moskva: Russkai?a? panorama. ISBN 5-93165-107-1. Note: Estimates for Soviet World War II casualties vary between sources.
Jump up ^ Geoffrey A. Hosking (2006). Rulers and victims: the Russians in the Soviet Union. Harvard University Press. p. 242. ISBN 0-674-02178-9
Jump up ^ "Reconstruction and Cold War". Library of Congress. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ Foreign trade from A Country Study: Soviet Union (Former). Library of Congress Country Studies project.
Jump up ^ "Great Escapes from the Gulag". TIME. June 5, 1978. Retrieved August 1, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Russia's Brightest Moment: The 1991 Coup That Failed".
Jump up ^ "1990 CIA World Factbook". Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved March 9, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Russia Unforeseen Results of Reform". The Library of Congress Country Studies; CIA World Factbook. Retrieved March 10, 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b c "Russian Federation" (PDF). Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Retrieved February 24, 2008.
Jump up ^ Sciolino, E. (December 21, 1993). "U.S. is abandoning 'shock therapy' for the Russians". New York Times. Retrieved January 20, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Russia: Economic Conditions in Mid-1996". Library of Congress. Retrieved March 4, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Russia: Clawing Its Way Back to Life (int'l edition)". BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on November 22, 2007. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ Walter C. Clemens (2001). The Baltic Transformed: Complexity Theory and European Security. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 106. ISBN 0-8476-9859-9.
^ Jump up to: a b Branko Milanovic (1998). Income, Inequality, and Poverty During the Transformation from Planned to Market Economy. The World Bank. pp. 186–189.
Jump up ^ Jason Bush (October 19, 2006). "What's Behind Russia's Crime Wave?". BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on December 20, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Russia pays off USSR's entire debt, sets to become crediting country". Pravda.ru. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ A. Aslund. "Russia's Capitalist Revolution" (PDF). Retrieved March 28, 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e f g The World Factbook. "CIA". Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved December 26, 2007.
Jump up ^ "Page Not Found" (PDF).
Jump up ^ Treisman, D. "Is Russia's Experiment with Democracy Over?". UCLA International Institute. Archived from the original on November 11, 2004. Retrieved December 31, 2007.
Jump up ^ Stone, N (December 4, 2007). "No wonder they like Putin". The Times. UK. Retrieved December 31, 2007.
Jump up ^ Reuters (March 3, 2014). "Ousted Ukrainian President Asked For Russian Troops, Envoy Says". NBC News. Retrieved March 21, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Putin to deploy Russian troops in Ukraine". BBC News. March 1, 2014. Retrieved March 1, 2014.
Jump up ^ Radyuhin, Vladimir (March 1, 2014). "Russian Parliament approves use of army in Ukraine". The Hindu. Chennai, India.
Jump up ^ Walker, Shaun (March 4, 2014). "Russian takeover of Crimea will not descend into war, says Vladimir Putin". The Guardian. Retrieved March 4, 2014.
Jump up ^ Yoon, Sangwon; Krasnolutska, Daryna; Choursina, Kateryna (March 4, 2014). "Russia Stays in Ukraine as Putin Channels Yanukovych Request". Bloomberg News. Retrieved March 5, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Ukraine crisis: Crimea parliament asks to join Russia". BBC News. March 6, 2014. Retrieved April 27, 2015.
Jump up ^ "OSCE". Retrieved April 27, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Report on the human rights situation in Ukraine". Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. April 15, 2014.
Jump up ^ Jacobs, Harrison (April 11, 2014). "The UN's Scathing Crimea Report Suggests Russia May Have Rigged Secession Vote". Business Insider. Archived from the original on May 2, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Jobbik MEP Béla Kovács: The Crimean referendum is perfectly legitimate". hungarianambiance.com. March 16, 2014. Retrieved April 27, 2015.
Jump up ^ March 16, 2014, David Herszenhornmarch, The New York Times, "Crimea Votes to Secede From Ukraine as Russian Troops Keep Watch."
Jump up ^ "Backing Ukraine's territorial integrity, UN Assembly declares Crimea referendum invalid" (PDF). UN Daily News. UN News Centre. March 27, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2016.
Jump up ^ "The Constitution of the Russian Federation". (Article 80, §1). Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ "The Constitution of the Russian Federation". (Article 81, §3). Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ "Democracy at a standstill" (PDF). World Justice Project. 2013. p. 7. Retrieved August 9, 2014.
Jump up ^ "World Justice Project Rule of Law Index 2014".
Jump up ^ Kosachev. K. "Russian Foreign Policy Vertical". Russia in Global Affairs. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ Venezuela's President Hugo Chavez recognizes independence of breakaway Georgia republics by Megan K. Stack. September 9, 2009
Jump up ^ Netanyahu declares Russia as superpower Russia Today News February 15, 2010
Jump up ^ Superpower Reborn Archived April 27, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. by Ronald Steel. New York Times, August 24, 2008
Jump up ^ "Russia is a Superpower CNN, US Senators telling the truth". CNN News. August 30, 2008.
Jump up ^ Rosefielde, Steven (2005). Russia in the 21st Century The Prodigal Superpower. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-83678-6.
Jump up ^ Atwell, Kyle (August 25, 2008). "Is Russia a Superpower? Cold War II?". Atlantic Review. Retrieved October 20, 2016.
Jump up ^ "What's Looming in Ukraine Is more Threatening than Georgia". Der Spiegel. October 16, 2008. Retrieved October 20, 2016. Nikonov: Russia is not a superpower and won't be one for the foreseeable future. But Russia is a great power. It was one, it is one and it will continue to be one.
Jump up ^ The Shanghai Cooperation Organisation at Globalsecurity.org April 27, 2005
Jump up ^ "Russian Federation – Member state". Council of Europe. Retrieved April 28, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Legal framework – The Partnership and Cooperation Agreement". Delegation of the European Union to Russia. February 13, 2009. Retrieved April 27, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Political framework – Europe and Russia: Building a Strategic Partnership". Delegation of the European Union to Russia. February 13, 2009. Retrieved April 27, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Interview of official Ambassador of Russian Foreign Ministry on relations with the EU" (in Russian). RIA Novosti. Retrieved June 30, 2008.
Jump up ^ "NATO-Russia relations". NATO. Archived from the original on April 11, 2007. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ Kotoky, Anurag (November 16, 2013). "Indian navy gets Russian carrier as it seeks to bolster military". Ruetes.
Jump up ^ Page, Jeremy (September 26, 2010). "Russian Oil Route Will Open to China". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved September 28, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Russia in milestone oil pipeline supply to China". Reuters. January 1, 2011. Retrieved March 21, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Amnesty International report on Russia". Amnesty International. Archived from the original on July 13, 2010. Retrieved July 11, 2010.
Jump up ^ Human Rights Watch on Russia and Chechnya HTW.org
Jump up ^ "Annual report Russia". Freedom House. May 10, 2004. Retrieved April 27, 2010.
Jump up ^ "In Russian: ??? ?????? ?????? ?????? Freedom House "???????" ? ????? ??????????". Newsru.com. Retrieved April 27, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Overview of the major Asian Powers" (PDF). International Institute for Strategic Studies: 31. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 11, 2009. Retrieved January 27, 2008.
Jump up ^ Russia pilots proud of flights to foreign shores Archived May 1, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. by David Nowak. The Associated Press, September 15, 2008
Jump up ^ "US drives world military spending to record high". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on June 13, 2006. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ "Russia arms exports could exceed $7 bln in 2007 – Ivanov". RIA Novosti. Retrieved January 27, 2008.
Jump up ^ Wezeman, Pieter D.; Siemon T. Wezeman (March 2015). "Trends in International Arms Transfer, 2014" (PDF). Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 5, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016.
Jump up ^ Kazak, Sergey. "Russia to Up Nuclear Weapons Spending 50% by 2016". RIA Novosti. Retrieved March 1, 2014.
Jump up ^ "SIPRI Military Expenditure Database". Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. Archived from the original on February 8, 2014. Retrieved March 1, 2014.
Jump up ^ Toohey, Nathan. "Russia's defense spending grows to third largest in the world". Moscow Times. Archived from the original on March 5, 2014. Retrieved March 1, 2014.
Jump up ^ "The Constitution of the Russian Federation". pravo.gov.ru (in Russian language). April 11, 2014. pp. 19, 21. Archived from the original on April 13, 2014.
Jump up ^ "Treaty Between the Russian Federation and the Republic of Crimea on Ascension to the Russian Federation of the Republic of Crimea and on Establishment of New Subjects Within the Russian Federation" (in Russian). Kremlin.ru. March 18, 2014. Retrieved April 10, 2014.
Jump up ^ "The Constitution of the Russian Federation". (Article 95, §2). Retrieved December 27, 2007.
^ Jump up to: a b Direct elections of heads of republics (and other federal subjects) are mandated by Article 18 of the Federal Law of 06.10.1999 No. 184-FZ as amended by Federal Law of 2.05.2012 No. 40-FZ
Jump up ^ Designation of republican heads as presidents is forbidden by Federal Law of 28.12.2010 No. 406-FZ Archived January 16, 2013, at the Wayback Machine., but transitional period lasts until January 1, 2015
Jump up ^ Russian Classification of Economic Regions (OK 024–95) of January 1, 1997 as amended by the Amendments #1/1998 through #5/2001. (Section I. Federal Districts)
Jump up ^ "General Information". Russian 6Embassy. Retrieved February 14, 2016.
Jump up ^ Regions of Russia. Social and economic indicators 2015 Russian Federal State Statistics Service
Jump up ^ Alton S Donnelly, The Russian Conquest of Bashkiria, 1968, pages 23 and 127; Lincoln, W. Bruce. The Conquest of a Continent: Siberia and the Russians. New York: Random House, 1994, p. 30
Jump up ^ "Oil prices drive the cost of food". RIA Novosti. Retrieved February 22, 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b Library of Congress. "Topography and drainage". Retrieved December 26, 2007.
Jump up ^ "Lake Baikal—A Touchstone for Global Change and Rift Studies". United States Geological Survey. Retrieved December 26, 2007.
Jump up ^ "Angara River". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2007. Retrieved December 26, 2007.
^ Jump up to: a b "Climate". Library of Congress. Retrieved December 26, 2007.
Jump up ^ "Pogoda.ru.net" (in Russian language). Retrieved September 8, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Pogoda.ru.net Climate VERKHOYANSK". Retrieved May 9, 2017.
Jump up ^ Drozdov, V. A.; Glezer, O. B.; Nefedova, T. G.; Shabdurasulov, I. V. (1992). "Ecological and Geographical Characteristics of the Coastal Zone of the Black Sea". GeoJournal. 27 (2): 169. doi:10.1007/BF00717701.
^ Jump up to: a b "FAO. 2010. Global Forest Resources Assessment 2010. Main Report. FAO Forestry Working Paper 163, Rome, Italy" (PDF). Retrieved May 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ Walsh, N. P. (September 19, 2003). "It's Europe's lungs and home to many rare species. But to Russia it's £100bn of wood". London: Guardian (UK). Retrieved December 26, 2007.
Jump up ^ I. A. Merzliakova (November 1, 1997). "List of animals of the Red Data Book of Russian Federation". UNEP/GRID–Arendal. Archived from the original on April 28, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2010.
Jump up ^ The World Heritage List—UNESCO. "Russian Federation". Retrieved July 26, 2017.
Jump up ^ The World Network of Biosphere Reserves—UNESCO. "Russian Federation". Retrieved December 26, 2007.
Jump up ^ [1], World Bank
Jump up ^ World Bank. "World Development Indicators". World Bank. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Russians weigh an enigma with Putin's protégé". MSNBC. Retrieved May 9, 2008.
Jump up ^ Mark Adomanis (October 9, 2012). "What is the Russian Middle Class? Probably Not What You Think". Forbes. Retrieved April 27, 2015.
Jump up ^ "The average salary in Russia is now lower than in China and Poland". rbth.
Jump up ^ "Lessons from the Russia's 2001 Flat Tax Reform". Voxeu.org. Retrieved May 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Number of Russians Living in Poverty Rises". The Wall Street Journal. March 21, 2016.
Jump up ^ "Russia's unemployment rate down 10% in 2007 – report". RIA Novosti. Retrieved May 9, 2008.
Jump up ^ "7 percent of the Russian population is categorized as middle class". insor-russia.ru. Retrieved June 3, 2017.
Jump up ^ Meyer, Henry; Anna; rianova (April 23, 2015). "Putin's Miracle Dissolves as Russian Middle Class Faces Crunch" – via www.bloomberg.com.
Jump up ^ "World Development Indicators: Contribution of natural resources to gross domestic product". World Bank. Archived from the original on 2014-10-22. Retrieved 21 July 2014.
Jump up ^ "Russia – Analysis". EIA. 12 March 2014. Archived from the original on 2014-03-24. Retrieved 21 July 2014.
Jump up ^ "Russia fixed asset investment to reach $370 bln by 2010–Kudrin". RIA Novosti. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ . cbr.ru http://www.cbr.ru/eng/hd_base/default.aspx?Prtid=mrrf_m. Retrieved June 3, 2017. Missing or empty |title= (help)
^ Jump up to: a b "Kudrin and Fischer honoured by Euromoney and IMF/World Bank meetings in Washington". Euromoney. Retrieved March 4, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Russia's foreign debt down 31.3% in Q3—finance ministry". RIA Novosti. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ Debt – external, CIA World Factbook. Retrieved May 22, 2010.
Jump up ^ Tavernise, S. (March 23, 2002). "Russia Imposes Flat Tax on Income, and Its Coffers Swell". The New York Times. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ "Global personal taxation comparison survey–market rankings". Mercer (consulting firms). Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ "Russia: How Long Can The Fun Last?". BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on December 13, 2006. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ Finnegan, Leah (July 22, 2010). "Countries with the MOST College Graduates (PHOTOS)". Huffington Post. Retrieved December 7, 2011.
Jump up ^ GRP by federal subjects of Russia, 1998–2007 (in Russian)
Jump up ^ "Inequality and the Putin Economy: Inside the Numbers". pbs.org. Frontline. Retrieved January 14, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Global Wealth Report 2014". Credit Suisse. Research Institute. Retrieved January 14, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Russia to invest $1 trillion in infrastructure by 2020 – ministry". RIA Novosti. Retrieved July 31, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Russia finally joins WTO". Financial Times. December 16, 2011. Retrieved May 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Doing business in Russia". Norwegian-Russian Chamber of Commerce. June 10, 2012. Archived from the original on September 18, 2007. Retrieved June 10, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Corruption Perceptions Index 2014". Transparency International. Retrieved 2015-12-04.
^ Jump up to: a b Suhara, Manabu. "Corruption in Russia: A Historical Perspective" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 4, 2016. Retrieved December 4, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Russia lost 4 billion dollars on unfavorable state procurement contracts in the last year". Meduza. Retrieved 2015-12-07.
Jump up ^ "Cops for hire". Economist. 2010. Retrieved 2015-12-04.
Jump up ^ Klara Sabirianova Peter; Tetyana Zelenska (2010). "Corruption in Russian Health Care: The Determinants and Incidence of Bribery" (PDF). Retrieved 2015-12-04.
Jump up ^ Elena Denisova-Schmidt; Elvira Leontyeva; Yaroslav Prytula (2014). "Corruption at Universities is a Common Disease for Russia and Ukraine". Harvard University. Retrieved 2015-12-04.
Jump up ^ e.V., Transparency International. "Corruption Perceptions Index 2016". www.transparency.org. Retrieved 2017-03-24.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e "ararat.osipian". sites.google.com.
Jump up ^ "???? ??????? ????????? ? ?? ????????? ????? ?? 15%, ??????? "???????-??????"... – ?????-????? – ?????????". Interfax.ru. Retrieved 2014-07-14.
Jump up ^ Source: Milov, Nemtsov, Ryzhkov, Shorina (2011). "Putin. Corruption. Independent expert report", p. 6.
Jump up ^ "????????? ? ?????? ??? ??????? "????????" ??? – ??????? ?? ??????? ????????, ?????????? ??????????, ?????????? ???????, ????????? ?? Newsland". Newsland.ru. Retrieved 2014-07-14.
Jump up ^ "??????? ?????? ?????? ? ?????? ? 2010 ???? ????? ? 27 ?? 47 ????? ??? | ??? ???????". Ria.ru. Retrieved 2014-07-14.
Jump up ^ Milov et al., Op. cit., 2011, p. 6.
Jump up ^ "Russian police arrest anti-corruption leader Navalny, hundreds more in nationwide rallies". Retrieved 2017-06-04.
Jump up ^ "Kremlin Critic Says Russian Premier, Dmitri Medvedev, Built Property Empire on Graft". Retrieved 2017-06-04.
Jump up ^ Sujata Rao (10 November 2014). "Falling rouble creates debt payment headache for Russian companies". Reuters. Retrieved 16 December 2014.
Jump up ^ "Today's Stock Market News and Analysis from Nasdaq.com". NASDAQ.com.
Jump up ^ Ostroukh, Andrey (January 17, 2014). "Russia Ready to Float Ruble Next Year Regardless of Rate". Wall Street Journal.
Jump up ^ Razumovskaya, Olga (July 25, 2014). "Russian Central Bank Raises Key Interest Rate to 8% From 7.5%". Wall Street Journal.
Jump up ^ "USD/RUB exchange rate". Bloomberg L.P.
Jump up ^ "China Embraces Russia", Bloomberg Business Week, October 9, 2014, pp 15–16.
Jump up ^ "Land Use", CIA World Factbook
Jump up ^ Data by Rosstat (in Russian)
Jump up ^ Russia takes the third place in the world by grain exports, rosbankjournal.ru (in Russian)
Jump up ^ Data by Rosstat (in Russian)
Jump up ^ "Agricultural land by type of owners", Rosstat, 2009 (in Russian)
Jump up ^ Main agricultural products by type of owners Rosstat, 2009 (in Russian)
Jump up ^ Brown, Felicity (September 2, 2009). "Fish capture by country since 1950". Guardian. Retrieved May 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Exports and imports of fish and sea products", Rosstat, 2009 (in Russian)
Jump up ^ ?????????? ?????? ?????? ???????? 2010 ???? [Global Forest Resources Assessment 2010] (PDF) (in Russian). FAO Forestry Working Paper 163, Rome, Italy. 2010.
Jump up ^ "Innovations and investments urged to modernize Russian forest sector www.fao.org". FAO. September 25, 2012. Retrieved May 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ "The Russian Federation Forest Sector Outlook Study to 2030" (PDF). FAO. Rome, Italy. 2012. Retrieved May 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ Gronholt-Pedersen, Jacon (22 September 2010). "Russia, China in Deal On Refinery, Not Gas". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 6 October 2017.
Jump up ^ Winfrey, Graham (6 January 2010). "Did A New Pipeline Just Make Russia The Most Important Energy Superpower By Far?". Business Insider. Retrieved 6 October 2017.
Jump up ^ Country Comparison :: Natural gas – proved reserves. CIA World Factbook. Retrieved February 3, 2014.
Jump up ^ Country Comparison :: Oil – proved reserves. CIA World Factbook. Retrieved February 3, 2014.
Jump up ^ "BP Statistical review of world energy June 2007". BP. June 2007. Archived from the original (XLS) on February 6, 2009. Retrieved October 22, 2007.
Jump up ^ Country Comparison :: Natural gas – exports. CIA World Factbook. Retrieved February 3, 2014.
Jump up ^ Country Comparison :: Electricity – production. CIA World Factbook. Retrieved February 3, 2014.
Jump up ^ "BP Statistical Review of World Energy June 2009: Hydroelectricity consumption". Archived from the original on February 6, 2009. Retrieved October 29, 2010.
Jump up ^ Nuclear Power Plant Information, International Atomic Energy Agency. Retrieved June 12, 2006.
Jump up ^ Russia builds nuclear power stations all over the world at amur.kp.ru (in Russian)
Jump up ^ "China and Russia sign $400 billion 30-year gas deal". Russia Herald. Retrieved May 22, 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b "Russian Railways". Eng.rzd.ru. Archived from the original on October 4, 2009. Retrieved January 2, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Invest in Russia–Infrastructure". Invest.gov.ru. Archived from the original on April 26, 2011. Retrieved April 27, 2010.
Jump up ^ CIS railway timetable, route No. 002, Moscow-Pyongyang, August 2009. Note: several different routes have the same number.
Jump up ^ CIS railway timetable, route No. 350, Kiev-Vladivostok, August 2009.
Jump up ^ Rosstat statistics on length of roads Retrieved June 10, 2009
Jump up ^ "Transport in Russia". International Transport Statistics Database. iRAP. Archived from the original on April 17, 2009. Retrieved February 17, 2009.
Jump up ^ "Russian Atomic Icebreakers". English Russia. March 31, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2015.
Jump up ^ "CIA The World Factbook–Rank Order–Airports". Cia.gov. Retrieved January 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ Yakov Sinai, ed. (2003). Russian Mathematicians in the 20th Century. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-981-02-4390-6.
Jump up ^ "The Poincaré Conjecture". Claymath.org. Archived from the original on April 28, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ Panzerkampfwagen T-34(r) by George Parada (n.d.) Achtung Panzer! website. Retrieved November 17, 2008
Jump up ^ Halberstadt, Hans Inside the Great Tanks The Crowood Press Ltd. Wiltshire, England 1997 94–96 ISBN 1-86126-270-1: "The T-54/T-55 series is the hands down, all time most popular tank in history".
Jump up ^ "Weaponomics: The Economics of Small Arms" (PDF). Retrieved May 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ Medvedev outlines priorities for Russian economy's modernization RIA Novosti
Jump up ^ "American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics". Aiaa.org. Retrieved January 2, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Russian space program in 2009: plans and reality". Russianspaceweb.com. Archived from the original on January 28, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2010.
Jump up ^ United Nations:Sanitation Country Profile Russian Federation, 2004
^ Jump up to: a b c Ethnic groups in Russia Archived June 22, 2011, at the Wayback Machine., 2002 census, Demoscope Weekly. Retrieved February 5, 2009.
Jump up ^ "Resident population". Rosstat. Archived from the original on March 3, 2012. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ Russian Federal State Statistics Service (2011). "????????????? ???????? ????????? 2010 ????. ??? 1" [2010 All-Russian Population Census, vol. 1]. ????????????? ???????? ????????? 2010 ???? (2010 All-Russia Population Census) (in Russian). Federal State Statistics Service. Retrieved June 29, 2012.
Jump up ^ "Demographics". Library of Congress. Retrieved January 16, 2008.
^ Jump up to: a b c d e f g h Modern demographics of Russia by Rosstat. Retrieved on October 5, 2010
Jump up ^ "Russia cracking down on illegal migrants". International Herald Tribune. January 15, 2007. Archived from the original on September 15, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Putin tries to lure millions of Russian expats home". Archived from the original on May 25, 2010. Retrieved 2010-04-25. Times Online. February 9, 2006.
Jump up ^ Moya Flynn. Migrant resettlement in the Russian federation: reconstructing 'homes' and 'homelands', Anthem Press (2004). p. 15. ISBN 1-84331-117-8
^ Jump up to: a b "Demographic balance and crude rates at national level". Eurostat. Retrieved June 1, 2016.
Jump up ^ "Russia's birth, mortality rates to equal by 2011–ministry". RIA Novosti. Retrieved February 10, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Country Profile: Russia" (PDF). Library of Congress—Federal Research Division. October 2006. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ "Russia trying to resolve demographic problem through immigration". rian.ru. July 14, 2006.
Jump up ^ Russian birth rates 1950–2008 Archived April 30, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Demoscope Weekly. Retrieved October 2010.
Jump up ^ "Immigration Drives Russian Population Increase". ria.ru. August 20, 2012.
Jump up ^ Surinov, A.; et al., eds. (2016). "5. Population: Cities with population size of 1 million persons and over". Russia in Figures (PDF) (Report). Moscow: Federal State Statistics Service (Rosstat). p. 82. ISBN 978-5-89476-420-7. Retrieved June 12, 2017.
Jump up ^ ????????, ?. ?. (2016). "31. ??????????? ????????? ??????? ? ???????? ?????????? ???? ?? ??????????? ??????? ? ????????? ?????????? ?????????". In ??????????, ?. ?. ??????????? ????????? ?????????? ?????????: ?? ????????????? ???????????? (Report) (in Russian). ??????: ??????????? ?????? ??????????????? ?????????? (???????). Retrieved June 12, 2017.
^ Jump up to: a b "?????? ??????????? ??????????? ????????? ?? 1 ?????? 2017 ???? ? ? ??????? ?? 2016 ???". gks.ru. Retrieved June 12, 2017.
Jump up ^ "??????????????? ?????? ??????????? ??????????? ????????? ?? 1 ?????? 2017 ???? ? ? ??????? ?? 2016 ??? ?? ????????? ??????? ? ????????????? ??????? ????????????? ????". krasstat.gks.ru. Retrieved June 12, 2017.
Jump up ^ "??????????? ????????? ?? ????????????? ??????? ? ????????? ??????? ????????????? ??????? ?? 1 ?????? 2017 ???? ? ? ??????? ?? 2016 ???". novosibstat.gks.ru. Retrieved June 12, 2017.
Jump up ^ "??????????????? ?????? ??????????? ????????? ?? 1 ?????? 2017 ???? ? ? ??????? ?? 2016 ???". sverdl.gks.ru. Retrieved June 12, 2017.
Jump up ^ "??????????? ????????? ????????????? ??????????? ?????????? ????????? ?? ?????? 2017 ????". tatstat.gks.ru. Retrieved June 12, 2017.
Jump up ^ "?????? ??????????? ????????? ?? 1 ?????? 2017 ???? ?? ????????????? ???????????? ?????????????? ????". krsdstat.gks.ru. Retrieved June 12, 2017.
Jump up ^ "??????????? ??????????? ????????? ??????????? ??????? ? ??????? ????????? ???????, ????????????? ???????, ????????? ? ???????? ????????? ?? 1 ?????? 2017 ????". chelstat.gks.ru. Retrieved June 12, 2017.
Jump up ^ "???? ?????? ??????????? ????????????? ??????????? ?????? ??????? (?????????)". gks.ru. Retrieved June 12, 2017.
^ Jump up to: a b "???????????? ??????????? ??????????? ????????? ????????? ??????? (?? 1. 1. 2017. ?. ? ????????????? ?? 2016. ?.)". samarastat.gks.ru. Retrieved June 12, 2017.
Jump up ^ "??????????? ??????????? ????????? ?????????? ?????????? /?????????? ????????? (?????? ?? 3. 3. 2017. ?., ? 08-08-4/891-??)/". udmstat.gks.ru. Retrieved June 12, 2017.
Jump up ^ "?????? ??????????? ??????????? ????????? ?????????? ???????????? ?? 1 ?????? 2017 ???? ?? ????????????? ????????????". gks.ru. Retrieved June 12, 2017.
Jump up ^ "Report by Mr. Alvaro Gil-Robles on his Visits to the Russian Federation". Council of Europe, Commissioner for Human Rights. 2005-04-20.
Jump up ^ "Russian Census of 2002". 4.3. Population by nationalities and knowledge of Russian; 4.4. Spreading of knowledge of languages (except Russian). Rosstat. Archived from the original on July 19, 2011. Retrieved January 16, 2008.
Jump up ^ "The Constitution of the Russian Federation". (Article 68, §2). Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ "Russian language". University of Toronto. Archived from the original on January 6, 2007. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ "Russian Language History". Foreigntranslations.com. Archived from the original on July 27, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ Matthias Gelbmann (March 19, 2013). "Russian is now the second most used language on the web". W3Techs. Q-Success. Retrieved June 17, 2013.
Jump up ^ "JAXA – My Long Mission in Space".
Jump up ^ Poser, Bill (May 5, 2004). "The languages of the UN". Itre.cis.upenn.edu. Retrieved October 29, 2010.
^ Jump up to: a b c d "??????????? ?????????-?????????? ?????????? ?? 5 ????? 1996 ?. / ????? 1. ?????? ???????????????? ?????".
Jump up ^ "??????????? ?????????? ?????? (??????? ?? XIV ?????? ???????????????? ???????? (????) – ?????????? ?????????? ?????? 10 ????? 1995 ????) / ????? 1. ????? ? ??????? ???????? ? ??????????".
Jump up ^ "??????????? ?????????? ????? (???????? ?????) (??????? 7 ???? 1997 ?.) / ????? I. ????? ?????????".
Jump up ^ ????? ?????????? ????? «? ??????». ????? I, ?????? 4 Archived September 25, 2015, at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "??????????? ?????????? ???????????? ?? 24 ??????? 1993 ?. N ??-22/15 / ????? 1. ?????? ???????????????? ????? ?????????? ????????????".
Jump up ^ "??????????? ?????????? ??????? (??????? ????????? ??????? ?????????? ??????? 22 ??????? 1994 ?.) / ????? 3. ??????????????-???????? ?????? ?????????? ???????".
Jump up ^ "??????????? ????????? ?????????? (??????? 23 ????? 2003 ?.) / ????? 1. ?????? ???????????????? ?????".
Jump up ^ "??????????? ????????? ?????????? (??????? ??????????????? ??????? ????????? ?????????? 30 ?????? 2000 ?.) / ????? 1. ?????? ???????????????? ????? ????????? ??????????".
^ Jump up to: a b "Constitution of the Republic of Crimea". Article 10 (in Russian language). State Council, Republic of Crimea. April 11, 2014. Retrieved October 14, 2014.
^ Jump up to: a b "??????????? ?????????? ???????? (??????? 21 ???????? 1995 ?.) / ????? 1. ?????? ???????????????? ????? ?????????? ???????? (?.?. 1 – 13)".
Jump up ^ "??????????? ?????????? ????????? (??????? 27 ??????? 1994 ?.)".
^ Jump up to: a b "??????????? ?????????-?????????? ?????????? ?? 1 ???????? 1997 ?. N 28-?? (??????? ??????????? ?????????-?????????? ?????????? 1 ???????? 1997 ?.) (? ????????, ???????? ??????????????? ????????? 12 ???? 2006 ?., ??????????????? ??????? ?? 28 ???? 2001 ?. / ????? III ??????????????? ??????????".
Jump up ^ "??????? ???????? (???????????) ?????????? ???????? ?? 5 ?????? 1994 ?".
Jump up ^ "??????????? ?????????? ??????? (??????? ?? XVII ?????? ?????????? ?????? ?????????? ??????? (??????? ??????) 25 ??? 1995 ????) / ????? III. ?????? ? ???????????????-??????????????? ?????????? ?????????? ???????".
Jump up ^ "??????????? ?????????? ???? ?? 17 ??????? 1994 ?. / ????? III. ??????????????? ?????? ?????????? ???? ? ???????????????-??????????????? ??????????".
^ Jump up to: a b "??????????? ?????????? ????? ?? (??????? ??????????????? ????????? ?????????? ????? ?? 24 ???? 1995 ?.) / ????? I. ?????? ???????????????? ?????".
Jump up ^ "??????????? ?????????? ???????? ??????-?????? (??????? ????????? ??????? ?????????? ???????? ?????? 12 ?????? 1994 ?.) / ????? 1. ?????? ???????????????? ?????".
Jump up ^ "??????????? ?????????? ????????? ?? 6 ?????? 1992 ?. / ????? 1. ??????????????? ????? ?????????? ?????????".
Jump up ^ "??????????? ?????????? ???? (??????? ???????????? ?????????? ???? 6 ??? 2001 ?.) / ????? I. ?????? ???????????????? ?????".
Jump up ^ "??????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?? 7 ??????? 1994 ?. / ????? 1. ?????? ???????????????? ?????". constitution.garant.ru.
Jump up ^ "??????????? (???????? ?????) ?????????? ???? (??????) / ????? 3. ???????????-??????????????? ??????, ???????????????-??????????????? ??????????".
Jump up ^ "Arena: Atlas of Religions and Nationalities in Russia". Sreda, 2012.
Jump up ^ 2012 Arena Atlas Religion Maps. "Ogonek", ? 34 (5243), 27/08/2012. Retrieved 21/04/2017. Archived.
Jump up ^ Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2007. Russia. Archived from the original on January 9, 2008. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ Oleg Rapov, Russkaya tserkov v IX–pervoy treti XII veka (The Russian Church from the 9th to the First 3rd of the 12th Century). Moscow, 1988.
Jump up ^ Arto Luukkanen (1994), The Party of Unbelief, Helsinki: Studia Historica 48, ISBN 951-710-008-6, OCLC 832629341
^ Jump up to: a b Kowalewski, David (October 1980). "Protest for Religious Rights in the USSR: Characteristics and Consequences". Russian Review. 39 (4): 426–441. doi:10.2307/128810. JSTOR 128810 – via JSTOR. (Registration required (help)).
Jump up ^ Ramet, Sabrina Petra. (Ed) (1993). Religious Policy in the Soviet Union. Cambridge University Press. p. 4.
Jump up ^ Anderson, John (1994). Religion, State and Politics in the Soviet Union and Successor States. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. p. 3. ISBN 0-521-46784-5.
Jump up ^ "Anti-religious Campaigns". Loc.gov. Retrieved September 19, 2011.
Jump up ^ Country Studies: Russia-The Russian Orthodox Church U.S. Library of Congress, Accessed April 3, 2008
Jump up ^ Tkatcheva, Anna (1994). "Neo-Hindu Movements and Orthodox Christianity in Post-Communist Russia". India International Centre Quarterly. 21 (2/3). pp. 151–162.
Jump up ^ Kharitonova, Valentina (2015). "Revived Shamanism in the Social Life of Russia". Folklore. 62. FB and Media Group of LM. pp. 37–54. doi:10.7592/FEJF2015.62. ISSN 1406-0949.
Jump up ^ ????? ??????? – ? ?????? 74% ???????????? ? 7% ????????? [Press releases – In Russia 74% are Orthodox and 7% are Muslims]. levada.ru (in Russian). December 17, 2012. Retrieved April 29, 2015.
Jump up ^ ????????: ????????????? [Values: Religious]. fom.ru (in Russian). June 14, 2013. Retrieved April 29, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Global Christianity – A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World's Christian Population". Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project. December 19, 2011. Retrieved April 29, 2015.
Jump up ^ ?????: ?????????? ???????????? ??????? ? ????????????? ??????: ???????????????? ????????????? [MEETING OF THE SCIENTIFIC COUNCIL VCIOM: The social well-being of Russians and economic realities: a disjointed space?]. Russian Public Opinion Research Center (in Russian). October 28, 2014. Retrieved April 29, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Views on globalisation and faith" (PDF). July 5, 2011. p. 40. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 17, 2013.
Jump up ^ ANALYSIS (May 10, 2017). "Religious Belief and National Belonging in Central and Eastern Europe" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on May 13, 2017. Retrieved May 12, 2017.
Jump up ^ Religious Belief and National Belonging in Central and Eastern Europe: 1. Religious affiliation; Pew Research Center, May 10, 2017
Jump up ^ "Religious Belief and National Belonging in Central and Eastern Europe". May 10, 2017.
Jump up ^ Rev. Canon Michael Bourdeaux (2002). "Trends in Religious Policy". In Imogen Bell. Eastern Europe, Russia and Central Asia 2003 (3 ed.). Taylor & Francis. p. 47. ISBN 978-1-85743-137-7. Retrieved April 29, 2015.
Jump up ^ ???????? ? ??????????? ????????????, ?????????????????? ? ?????????? ????????? ?? ?????? ??????????? ??????????????? ?????? [Data about religious organizations registered in Russian Federation according to Federal Migration Service records] (in Russian language). December 19, 2006. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ "Over 90 percent of Russians are going to celebrate Easter anyway – poll". Interfax Religion. April 22, 2011. Retrieved November 2, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Russian Federation". Europe: Belarus, Russian Federation and Ukraine. World and Its Peoples. Marshall Cavendish. 2010. p. 1387. ISBN 978-0-7614-7900-0. Retrieved April 29, 2015.
Jump up ^ Zuckerman, P. (2005). "Atheism: Contemporary Rates and Patterns". In Michael Martin. The Cambridge Companion to Atheism. Cambridge University Press.
Jump up ^ ????????? ????? ????????? ???????? ??????? [Sociologists have counted Russian believers anew] (in Russian). SOVA Center for Information and Analysis. January 15, 2013. Retrieved April 29, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Global Index of Religion and Atheism" (PDF). Worldwide Independent Network/Gallup International Association. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 12, 2012. Retrieved November 7, 2015.
Jump up ^ Myers (2016). The New Tsar. p. 404.
Jump up ^ Woods, Mark. "How the Russian Orthodox Church is backing Vladimir Putin's new world order". Christian Today. Retrieved March 12, 2017.
Jump up ^ Higgins, Andrew (September 13, 2016). "In Expanding Russian Influence, Faith Combines With Firepower". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 12, 2017.
Jump up ^ "Russia Tier1 USCIRF recommended countries of particular concern (CPC)" (PDF). April 26, 2017.
Jump up ^ "RUSSIA:Jehovah's Witnesses banned, property confiscated".
Jump up ^ "Russia Religion News".
Jump up ^ "Russia: Court Bans Jehovah's Witnesses".
Jump up ^ "The Constitution of the Russian Federation". Article 41. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ ?????????? ????????? ????? ???????? ? ?????????????? ?? "????????" ????? ??? [Russian ombudsman will be fighting discrimination based on passport "registration" in the courts] (in Russian). June 6, 2007. Retrieved July 23, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Healthcare in Russia – Don't Play Russian Roulette". justlanded.com. Retrieved October 3, 2010.[permanent dead link]
Jump up ^ W. R. Leonard (April 2002). "Declining growth status of indigenous Siberian children in post-Soviet Russia". Human Biology. Archived from the original on 2009-06-28. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
^ Jump up to: a b ????????? ????????????????? ????? ??? ???????? [Life expectancy at birth] (XLS). Rosstat. April 2, 2015. Retrieved April 26, 2015.
Jump up ^ "In Putin's Russia, Universal Health Care Is for All Who Pay". Bloomberg.com. May 13, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2017.
Jump up ^ http://www.jamestown.org/single/?tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=42927&no_cache=1#.V5RZTqIlrIU
Jump up ^ Huffington Post: Countries With The MOST College Graduates retrieved September 27, 2013
Jump up ^ David Johnson, ed., Politics, Modernisation and Educational Reform in Russia: From Past to Present (2010)
Jump up ^ Smolentseva, A. "Bridging the Gap Between Higher and Secondary Education in Russia". Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ "Background Note: Russia". U.S. Department of State. Retrieved January 2, 2008.
Jump up ^ "Higher Education Institutions". Rosstat. Archived from the original on March 3, 2012. Retrieved January 1, 2008.
Jump up ^ "How to Cook Golubtzy". Moscow-russia-insiders-guide.com. August 6, 2011. Archived from the original on May 1, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ The first stone tented roof church and the origins of the tented roof architecture by Sergey Zagraevsky at RusArch.ru (in Russian)
Jump up ^ The shapes of domes of ancient Russian churches by Sergey Zagraevsky at the site of RusArch.ru (in Russian)
Jump up ^ Russian: ????????????? ?? ???? ? ?? ???? "?? ?????????? ????????? ? ?????????????? ? ?????????????", November 4, 1955 (Khrushchev's decree On liquidation of excesses ...) (in Russian)
Jump up ^ Russian Academy of Arts official site.
Jump up ^ Gray, Camilla (2002). Russian Experiment in Art. London: Thames and Hudson. p. 9.
Jump up ^ Norris, Gregory; ed. Stanley, Sadie (1980). The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, 2nd edition. London: MacMillian. p. 707. ISBN 0-333-23111-2.
Jump up ^ "Russia::Music". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved October 5, 2009.
Jump up ^ Garafola, L (1989). Diaghilev's Ballets Russes. Oxford University Press. p. 576. ISBN 0-19-505701-5.
Jump up ^ K. K. Cashin. "Alexander Pushkin's Influence on Russian Ballet—Chapter Five: Pushkin, Soviet Ballet, and Afterward" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on January 2, 2008. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ "A Tale of Two Operas". Petersburg City. Retrieved January 11, 2008.
Jump up ^ History of Rock Music in Russia at Russia-InfoCentre
Jump up ^ Kelly, C (2001). Russian Literature: A Very Short Introduction (Paperback). Oxford Paperbacks. ISBN 0-19-280144-9.
Jump up ^ "Russian literature; Leo Tolstoy". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved April 11, 2008.
Jump up ^ Otto Friedrich (September 6, 1971). "Freaking-Out with Fyodor". Time Magazine. Retrieved April 10, 2008.
Jump up ^ McGuire, Patrick L. (1985). Red stars: political aspects of Soviet science fiction. Studies in speculative fiction (Vol. 7, ill.). UMI Research Press. ISBN 0-8357-1579-5.Glad, John (1971). Russian Soviet science fiction and related critical activity. New York University.Tevis, Yvonne Pacheco, Reginald, R. (1983). East of the Sun: Russian and Eastern European Science Fiction. Science fiction and fantasy criticism (Vol. 5). Ayer Company. ISBN 0-88143-038-2.
^ Jump up to: a b "Russia:Motion pictures". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2007. Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ Birgit Beumers. A History of Russian Cinema. Berg Publishers (2009). ISBN 978-1-84520-215-6. p. 143.
Jump up ^ "White Sun of the Desert". Film Society of Lincoln Center. Archived from the original on September 5, 2008. Retrieved January 18, 2008.
Jump up ^ Dzieciolowski, Z. "Kinoeye: Russia's reviving film industry". Retrieved December 27, 2007.
Jump up ^ "Russian Entertainment & Media Industry worth $27.9 bn by 2011". joomag magazine. Retrieved October 3, 2010.
Jump up ^ "The USSR and Olympism" (PDF). Olympic Review. International Olympic Committee (84): 530–557. October 1974. Retrieved March 28, 2008.
Jump up ^ Ruiz, Rebecca (18 July 2016). "Russia May Face Olympics Ban as Doping Scheme Is Confirmed". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 26 July 2016.
Jump up ^ "MCLAREN INDEPENDENT INVESTIGATION REPORT - PART II". wada-ama.org. 9 December 2016.
Jump up ^ Ruiz, Rebecca R. (9 December 2016). "Russia's Doping Program Laid Bare by Extensive Evidence in Report". The New York Times.
Jump up ^ Ostlere, Lawrence (9 December 2016). "McLaren report: more than 1,000 Russian athletes involved in doping conspiracy". The Guardian.
Jump up ^ Ellingworth, James (13 December 2016). "Emails show how Russian officials covered up mass doping". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 14 December 2016.
Jump up ^ "The 2018 Winter Olympics Are Already Tainted". The New York Times. 27 December 2017. Retrieved 27 December 2017.
Jump up ^ "IIHF Centennial All-Star Team". Iihf.com. Archived from the original on June 10, 2009. Retrieved April 27, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Pure gold: Russia repeats!". IIHF. May 10, 2009. Retrieved August 28, 2015.
Jump up ^ "Russian league tops first CHL ranking". March 7, 2008. Retrieved August 28, 2015.
Jump up ^ "World of difference for KHL?". iihf.com. May 7, 2012. Retrieved August 28, 2015.
Jump up ^ "KHL is on the 4th place by attendance". IIHF. Retrieved June 2, 2017.
Jump up ^ "Russian Bandy Championship, 2006–7 season". bandy.ru. Retrieved October 3, 2010.
Jump up ^ Ralph Hickok (February 18, 2013). "Bandy". Hickoksports.com. Archived from the original on February 23, 2002. Retrieved May 4, 2013.
Jump up ^ "Yashin, the impregnable Spider". FIFA. Retrieved November 28, 2013
Jump up ^ "Russia announce the 11 host cities to stage matches for 2018 World Cup". The Guardian. April 6, 2017.
Jump up ^ "Legendary Olympians". CNN. August 19, 2008.
Jump up ^ Lohn, John (2013). They Ruled the Pool: The 100 Greatest Swimmers in History. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 35.
Jump up ^ "Chessgames guide to the World Championship". Chessgames.com. Retrieved October 29, 2010.
Jump up ^ "WADA Statement regarding conclusion of McLaren Investigation". World Anti-Doping Agency. December 9, 2016.
Jump up ^ "Russia secures 2014 grand prix deal". ESPN. Retrieved October 24, 2011.
Jump up ^ "Official days off for public holidays in Russia". Sras.org. Retrieved October 29, 2010.
Jump up ^ "Tourism Highlights 2014" (PDF). UNWTO (World Tourism Organization). 2014. Retrieved January 20, 2015.[permanent dead link]
Jump up ^ Kuzmin, Viktor (July 3, 2014). "Concern in Russia as foreign tourist numbers slump".
External links
Find more about
Russia
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity
	Look up Russia, ??????, or ???? in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Government
Official Russian governmental portal
Chief of State and Cabinet Members
Russian News Agency "Ria Novosti"
Russian radio "Voice of Russia"
General information
Russia at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
 Wikimedia Atlas of Russia
 Geographic data related to Russia at OpenStreetMap
"Russia". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.
Russia at UCB Libraries GovPubs
Russia from the BBC News
Russia at Encyclopædia Britannica
Key Development Forecasts for Russia from International Futures
Other
Post-Soviet Problems from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
Russia Beyond the Headlines International news project about Russia
Official Russia Travel Guide
Russian Consulate
[show]
Articles related to Russia
Authority control	
WorldCat Identities VIAF: 168830626 LCCN: n92056007 GND: 4076899-5 SUDOC: 031531156 BNF: cb122728378 (data) HDS: 3376 NDL: 00569699 NKC: ge130512
Categories: RussiaBRICS nationsE7 nationsEastern European countriesFederal republicsG8 nationsG20 nationsKievan Rus'Member states of the Commonwealth of Independent StatesMember states of the Council of EuropeMember states of the United NationsNorth Asian countriesNortheast Asian countriesNorthern European countriesRussian-speaking countries and territoriesSlavic countries and territoriesStates and territories established in 1547States and territories established in 1991Countries in AsiaCountries in Europe
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch

Search Wikipedia
Go
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikinews
Wikiquote
Wikivoyage
Languages
Acèh
????????
????????
Afrikaans
Akan
Alemannisch
????
Ænglisc
??????
???????
Aragonés
?????
Armãneashti
Arpetan
???????
Asturianu
Avañe'?
????
Aymar aru
Az?rbaycanca
??????
Bamanankan
?????
Bahasa Banjar
Bân-lâm-gú
Basa Banyumasan
?????????
??????????
?????????? (???????????)?
???????
Bikol Central
Bislama
?????????
Boarisch
???????
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
??????
Català
???????
Cebuano
Ceština
Chamoru
Chavacano de Zamboanga
Chi-Chewa
ChiShona
ChiTumbuka
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Davvisámegiella
Deitsch
Deutsch
??????????
Diné bizaad
Dolnoserbski
?????
Eesti
????????
Emiliàn e rumagnòl
??????
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
E?egbe
?????
Fiji Hindi
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Fulfulde
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gagauz
Gàidhlig
Galego
??
Gikuyu
?????
???????
????????????
?????? ?????? / Gõychi Konknni
???/Hak-kâ-ngî
??????
???
Hausa
Hawai?i
???????
??????
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Igbo
Ilokano
????????????? ???????
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
??????/inuktitut
Iñupiak
????
IsiXhosa
IsiZulu
Íslenska
Italiano
?????
Basa Jawa
Kalaallisut
?????
Kapampangan
????????-???????
???????
????? / ?????
Kaszëbsczi
???????
Kernowek
Kinyarwanda
Kirundi
Kiswahili
????
Kongo
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî
????????
????? ????
Ladino
?????
?????
???
???? ??????
Latgalu
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuviu
Ligure
Limburgs
Lingála
Livvinkarjala
La .lojban.
Luganda
Lumbaart
Magyar
??????
??????????
Malagasy
??????
Malti
Maori
?????
?????????
????
????????
Bahasa Melayu
Baso Minangkabau
Mìng-de?ng-ng?¯
Mirandés
???????
????????????
??????
??????????
Nahuatl
Dorerin Naoero
Na Vosa Vakaviti
Nederlands
Nedersaksies
??????
????? ????
???
Napulitano
???????
Nordfriisk
Norfuk / Pitkern
Norsk
Norsk nynorsk
Nouormand
Novial
Occitan
???? ?????
?????
Oromoo
O?zbekcha/???????
??????
????
Pälzisch
Pangasinan
??????
Papiamentu
????
Patois
????? ????
?????????
Picard
Piemontèis
Tok Pisin
Plattdüütsch
Polski
???t?a??
Português
Qaraqalpaqsha
Qirimtatarca
Reo tahiti
Româna
Romani
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
??????????
???????
???? ????
Gagana Samoa
?????????
Sängö
Sardu
Scots
Seeltersk
Sesotho
Sesotho sa Leboa
Setswana
Shqip
Sicilianu
?????
Simple English
????
SiSwati
Slovencina
Slovenšcina
?????????? / ??????????
Slunski
Soomaaliga
?????
Sranantongo
?????? / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / ??????????????
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
?????
Taqbaylit
Tarandíne
???????/tatarça
??????
Tetun
???
????
??????
Lea faka-Tonga
???
Tsetsêhestâhese
Tshivenda
????
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Twi
???? ???
??????
?? ????
??????????
????
???????? / Uyghurche
Vahcuengh
Vèneto
Vepsän kel’
Ti?ng Vi?t
Volapük
Võro
Walon
??
West-Vlams
Winaray
Wolof
??
Xitsonga
??????
Yorùbá
??
Zazaki
Zeêuws
Žemaiteška
??
??????
Kab?y?
Edit links
This page was last edited on 10 January 2018, at 06:45.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewEnable previews
Wikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki


